AAP  
 
Annual Action Plan
ADB 
Asian Development Bank
 
 
ADD 
Acute Diarrheal Diseases
 
 
AI 
Artificial Intelligence
 
 
AGM 
Annual General Meeting
 
 
BCC 
Behavior Change Communication
 
 
CPHEEO 
Central Public Health & Environmental 
 
Engineering Organization
CBO 
Community Based Organisation
 
 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization
 
 
CWPP 
Community Water Purification Plant 
  
(CWPP)
DAP 
 
District Action Plan
DDP 
Desert Development Programme
 
 
DDWS 
Department of Drinking Water and 
  
Sanitation
DMDF 
District Mineral Development Fund
  
DPAP 
Drought Prone Area Programme
 
 
DPR 
Detailed Project Report
 
 
DWSM 
District Water and Sanitation Mission
  
EAP 
Externally Aided Projects
 
 
EBR 
Extra Budgetary Resources
 
 
ESR 
Elevated Storage Reservoir
 
 
FC 
Fully Covered
 
 
FHTC 
Functional Household Tap Connection
 
 
FTK 
Field Test Kit
 
 
GoI
Government of India
 
 
GBS 
Gross Budgetary Support
 
 
GIS 
Geographic Information System
 
 
GP 
Gram Panchayat
 
 
HRD 
Human Resource Development
 
 
HR 
Human Resources
 
 
IMIS 
Integrated Management Information 
 
 
System
IEC 
Information, Education and 
 
 
Communication
IFD 
Integrated Finance Division
 
 
IPC 
Inter Personal Communication
 
 
ISA 
Implementation Support Agency
 
 
JE-AES 
Japanese Encephalitis - Acute Encephalitis 
  
Syndrome
JJM 
Jal Jeevan Mission
 
 
KRC
Key Resource Centre
 
 
LPCD 
Litres Per Capita Per Day
 
 
M&E 
Monitoring & Evaluation
 
 
MeITY 
Ministry of Electronics & Information 
  
Technology
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
 
Employment Guarantee Act
MPLADS
Members of Parliament Local Area 
 
Development Scheme
MLALADS Member of Legislative Assembly Local 
 
Area Development Scheme
MVS 
Multi Village Scheme
 
 
NDB 
New Development Bank
 
 
NE 
North East
 
 
NGT 
National Green Tribunal
 
 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization
 
 
NJJM 
National Jal Jeevan Mission
 
 
NRDWP 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme
 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance
  
PMKVK 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Kendra
  
PFMS 
Public Financial Management System
  
PHED 
Public Health Engineering Department
  
PPP 
Public Private Partnership
 
 
PPR 
Preliminary Project Report
 
 
Abbreviations
PRA 
Participatory Rural Appraisal
 
 
PRI 
Panchayati Raj Institutions
 
 
Q&Q 
Quality and Quantity
 
 
R&D 
Research and Development
 
 
RJJK 
Rashtriya Jal Jeevan Kosh
 
 
RWH 
Rain Water Harvesting
 
 
RWS 
 
Rural Water Supply
SAP 
 
State Action Plan
SCADA 
Supervisory Control and Data Access
  
SBM(G) 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen)
  
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals
 
 
SHG 
Self Help Group
 
 
SLSSC 
 
State Level Scheme Sanctioning 
Committee 
SVS 
Single Village Scheme
 
 
SWSM 
State Water and Sanitation Mission
  
ToR 
Terms of Reference
 
 
TSS 
Tribal Sub Scheme
 
 
ToT 
Training of Trainers
 
 
UC 
Utilization Certificate
 
 
U-DISE 
Unified District Information on School 
  
Education
VAP 
Village Action Plan
 
 
VO 
Village Organisation
 
 
VWSC 
Village Water and Sanitation Committee
  
WASMO 
Water And Sanitation Management 
 
Organisation
WQM&S Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance
 
Abbreviations
Functional Household Tap Connection [FHTC]  A tap 
connection to a rural household for providing drinking 
water in adequate quantity of prescribed quality on 
regular basis.
Functionality  Functionality of a tap connection is 
defined as having infrastructure, i.e. household tap 
connection providing water in adequate quantity, i.e. 
at least 55 lpcd, of prescribed quality, i.e. BIS:10500 
standard, on regular basis, i.e. continuous supply in 
long-term.
In-village water supply infrastructure  The piped 
water supply infrastructure of a new scheme/ 
retrofitting of existing scheme/ augmentation of 
existing water source(s) and its necessary components 
including ESR, sump, rain water harvesting, artificial 
recharge structures, greywater management 
infrastructure, washing/ bathing place, cattle troughs, 
etc. In desert, drought-prone, hilly and water-stressed 
areas, cluster storage is also part of in-village water 
supply infrastructure.
Distribution network  Pipelines carrying raw/ treated 
water from source to village level sump on one hand 
and within the village, pipelines carrying water to 
households on the other.
Bulk water transfer  Transfer of raw/ treated potable 
water in bulk by means of open channels or pipelines or 
a combination of both from a source to an area where 
no local water source is available. The provision of water 
will be for both domestic and industrial needs in rural 
and urban areas. In rural areas, bulk water will be made 
available at the boundary of the village. Thereafter, 
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. will have to manage, 
operate & maintain as is in a Single Village Scheme. The 
transfer of bulk water may be on a long-term 
continuous basis or intermittent and temporary basis, 
and is to be equipped to measure the supply in terms of 
quantity, quality and regularity.
Community  Group of people living in a village/ 
habitation.  
Habitation  A group of minimum 20 households and/ 
or 100 persons. However, in hilly/ tribal and forested 
areas, and SC/ ST dominant habitations having lower 
number of households and/ or persons, are also to be 
covered. Providing FHTC for single houses/ farm 
houses far away from villages/ habitations are not be 
funded under JJM.
Drinking water source  Groundwater (open well, 
borewell, tubewell, handpump, etc.)/ surface water 
(spring, checkdam, river, lake, pond, reservoir, etc.)/ 
rain water, available for drinking and domestic use.
Premises    As defined for Census operation.
Rural Water Supply (RWS) Department  The 
department having mandate for rural water supply in 
the State which may be PHED/ Panchayati Raj/ Rural 
Development/ Board/ Corporation, etc.
Water-stressed areas  The districts and blocks 
identified by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) 
from time to time.
Utility  An organization focusing on service delivery, 
i.e. water supply in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality on regular basis, and having operational and 
financial sustainability.
Water Quality Monitoring - Laboratory and field 
testing of water samples collected from water sources 
and FHTCs by the agency responsible for rural water 
supply as per the uniform drinking water quality 
monitoring protocol.
Water Quality Surveillance  A regular activity based on 
uniform drinking water quality monitoring protocol, to 
be undertaken by local community, Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ 
User Group, etc. or Schools using Field Test Kits (FTKs) 
and similar assessments to identify and evaluate factors 
associated with drinking water which could pose a risk 
to health.
Functionality Assessment  An assessment of 
functionality of rural household tap connections based 
on sample survey.
NABL accredited laboratories  Water quality testing 
laboratories accredited by National Accreditation 
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL).
Village Action Plan (VAP)  Plan prepared by Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Definitions 
(in the context of Jal Jeevan Mission)
 IS 10500:2012 'Indian Standard  Drinking Water Specicaon' as amended from me to me. 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. based on baseline survey, 
resource mapping and felt needs of village community 
to provide FHTC to every rural household, treat the 
generated greywater and plan its reuse, undertake 
surveillance activities, etc. VAP also indicates the fund 
requirement and timelines for completion of work 
under the Mission and will be approved by the Gram 
Sabha. Irrespective of source of funding, all drinking 
water-related works in the village are taken up based 
on the VAP.
District Action Plan (DAP)  A plan prepared by DWSM 
by aggregating all VAPs and additional work, i.e. bulk 
water transfer, distribution network, laboratories, etc. 
to ensure drinking water security in all the villages/ 
habitations of the district along with financial details 
and timelines.
State Action Plan (SAP)  A plan prepared by SWSM by 
aggregating all DAPs and regional water supply 
scheme, bulk water transfer and treatment plants, etc. 
to achieve overall drinking water security in the State 
and used for financial planning to cover all rural 
households in State.
Conjunctive use of water  Harmonious use of surface 
water, groundwater and rain water to ensure 
availability of water without disruption and also to 
optimize utilization of sources.
Coverage  Percentage of households provided with 
FHTCs at any point in time in a revenue village. 
Community bathing & washing blocks  Bathing and 
toilet place with taps; washing place with multiple taps 
and greywater management measures developed for 
an average use of 20 families in areas where individuals 
do not have their own toilets and/ or bathing & washing 
spaces.
Cattle trough  A long, narrow open structure to 
provide drinking water to animals.
Definitions
ater is one of the most essential 
W
requirements of life. Assured availability of 
potable water is vital for human 
development. India is home to 18% of global human 
population and 15% of global livestock population. 
However, it has only 2% land mass and 4% of global 
freshwater resources. As per estimates; in 1951, per 
capita annual freshwater availability was 5,177 cubic 
meters which came down to 1,545 cubic meters in 
. It is estimated that in 2019, it is about 1,368 cubic 
meters which is likely to further go down to 1,293 cubic 
meters in 2025. If present trend continues, in 2050, 
freshwater availability is likely to decline to 1,140 cubic 
meters. 
With the growing population and expanding economic 
activities, there is an increase in demand for water in 
various sectors, viz. agriculture, industry, domestic, 
recreation, infrastructure development, etc., whereas 
the source of water is finite. Thus, finite availability and 
competing demands make drinking water management 
a complex issue. The widening demand-supply gap is 
further compounded by other challenges, viz. depletion 
of groundwater caused by over-extraction, poor 
recharge, low storage capacity, erratic rainfall due to 
climate change, presence of contaminants, poor 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of water supply 
systems, etc.
In pre-Independent India, the water management 
systems and structures were adequate to cater to the 
low population. Local communities have been known 
for designing their own systems using traditional 
knowledge and wisdom to fulfill needs of the 
community in different edapho-climatic conditions. 
However, with increasing population and disruption in 
rainfall pattern and decrease in storage, challenges 
related to scarcity of water have become acute.
Post Independence, the State Governments have 
implemented rural water supply programmes to 
provide safe drinking water to rural population. In 1972, 
as part of Minimum Needs Programme, Government of 
India started supporting States through Accelerated 
Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP). Since then, 
Government of India has taken a number of initiatives 
to assist the States in their endeavor to enable every 
rural household to have access to potable water.
Under the erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP), 2017, one of the objectives was 
to 'enable all households to have access to and use safe 
& adequate drinking water within premises to the 
extent possible' which was proposed to be achieved by 
, coinciding with the United Nation's Sustainable 
Development Goals (UN-SDG 6).  
Piped water supply for drinking and domestic purposes 
to rural areas is a very critical and challenging task. 
Over the years, some important lessons have been 
learnt from the water supply programmes, which inter-
alia include:
i.) inadequate investments to meet both capital 
requirements as well as Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) led to incomplete and/ or defunct water 
supply systems;
ii.) most of the rural water supply schemes being 
dependant on ground water, withdrawal of excess 
ground water for agricultural purposes led to 
systems not serving the full design period;
iii.) source sustainability measures such as aquifer 
recharge, rain water harvesting, increased storage 
capacity of water bodies, reservoirs, de-silting, etc. 
improve the lifespan of water supply systems;
iv.) quite often, poor maintenance of schemes led to 
investments going waste;
v.) there is a willingness by community to pay for 
water, provided there is an assured service 
delivery;
Introduction 
DoWR,RD&GR. Future assessment based on populaon projecon.
CHAPTER
vi.) there is a need for development of utility mindset 
to focus on service delivery;
vii.) in-village water supply system sustainability 
depends on community ownership and hence it is 
imperative to engage communities in planning, 
implementation, management, O&M of water 
supply systems. Successful initiatives like Water 
and Sanitation Management Organisation 
(WASMO) in Gujarat, Swajal in Uttarakhand and 
many other initiatives in various States both by 
Government and NGOs have proved that 
community ownership is the key to ensure long-
term sustainability of sources and systems.
In the last five years, due to the emphasis laid by the 
Government in providing basic services like housing, 
toilets, electricity, cooking gas, healthcare, financial 
services, social security, broadband connectivity, 
roads, etc., the logical aspiration of people now is to 
have piped water supply within their household 
premises which will help in improving 'ease of living'. 
Assured availability of drinking water in the household 
premises will not only improve the health and socio-
economic condition of rural population, it will also 
bring down the drudgery of rural women and girls.
In this backdrop, Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) has been 
launched which aims at providing Functional 
Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every rural 
household by 2024. The programme focuses on 
service delivery at household level, i.e. water supply on 
regular basis
adequate quantity
prescribed 
 in 
 and of 
quality. This necessitates use of modern technology in 
planning and implementation of water supply 
schemes, development of water sources, treatment 
and supply of water, empowerment of Gram 
Panchayat/ local community, focus on service delivery, 
partner with other stakeholders, convergence with 
other programmes, methodical monitoring of the 
programme and to capture service delivery data 
automatically for ensuring the quality of services. This 
will help in achieving the goal of Jal Jeevan Mission in 
its true letter and spirit.
The 73  Amendment to the Constitution of India has 
rd
placed the subject of drinking water in the Eleventh 
Schedule and has assigned its management to Gram 
Panchayats. Keeping this in view, under JJM, Gram 
Panchayats and local community will play the pivotal 
role in planning, implementation, management, 
operation and maintenance of in-village water supply 
systems including drinking water sources. Public 
Health Engineering Departments (PHED)/ Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj/ RWS Departments in-
charge of rural drinking water in States will facilitate 
Gram Panchayats to perform their duties as envisaged 
in the Constitution.
Decentralized, demand-driven, community-managed 
implementation of the programme will instill 'sense of 
ownership' among the local community, create an 
environment of trust and bring in transparency leading 
to better implementation and long-term O&M of water 
supply systems. It will also ensure equity in accessing 
supply for every household and regular supply, thus 
willingness to pay for services. The incidents of 
diversion of water supply for other purposes will also 
get controlled.
There are number of stakeholders working in the water 
supply sector, viz. Research & Development (R&D) 
institutions, Trusts, Foundations, Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), Village Organizations (VOs), 
Community Based Organizations (CBOs), Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), user groups, corporates, international 
agencies and spirited individuals. To make water 
everyone's business, mission will strive to build 
partnerships and work together with these institutions/ 
individuals to achieve the goal set under JJM and long-
term drinking water security. Government has already 
initiated Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA), an intensive campaign 
in water-stressed districts to harmonize water 
conservation efforts of all stakeholders.
As per Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS) maintained by Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation (DDWS), as on 31.3.2019, about 18%, i.e. 
.28 Crore out of the total 17.87 Crore rural households 
in the country have tap water connection. Thus, about 
.60 Crore households are without tap water 
connection and planned to be covered in partnership 
with States/ UTs under the mission by 2024.
The current scenario necessitates proper planning, 
strategizing and implementing water supply systems 
including development of proper institutional 
mechanism at all levels. While planning and 
implementing water supply schemes under Jal Jeevan 
Mission, it is imperative that proper techno-economic 
appraisal and socio-economic analysis is carried out, 
most appropriate option is opted, and necessary 
approval of the local community/ User Group is taken for 
in-village water supply infrastructure to ensure that they 
have a 'sense of ownership' and are ready to undertake 
steps to manage, operate & maintain the system as well 
as drinking water sources for long-term sustainability.
Introduction 
.1   Historical perspective  
Post-independence at the time of launch of India's 
planned development, the Environmental Hygiene 
Committee recommended a programme to provide 
safe water supply to all villages within a certain period 
as part of First Five Year Plan (1951-56). For this 
purpose, the National Water Supply Programme was 
launched in 1954, under the health sector. 
Until the Third Five Year Plan (1961-66), drinking water 
supply in the rural areas was a component of the 
Community Development Programme. This effort was 
supplemented by the Ministry of Health under the then 
National Water Supply and Sanitation Programme. 
In 1972-73, Accelerated Rural Water Supply 
Programme (ARWSP) was launched to supplement the 
efforts of State Governments, especially in areas of 
acute scarcity and those endemic to water borne 
diseases. The programme gained further momentum 
during the Fifth Five Year Plan (1974-79) under the 
Minimum Needs Programme. 
In 1986, the National Drinking Water Mission (NDWM), 
popularly known as the Technology Mission was 
launched in order to provide scientific input and cost-
effective technological solutions to address water 
scarcity. 
In the Eighth Plan (1992-97), Sub-missions for tackling 
quality problem, i.e. habitations suffering from excess 
Arsenic, Fluoride, Iron, salinity, scarcity of water 
sources, and requiring sustainability of the sources & 
the systems, were taken up. 
In 1999-2000, decentralized, demand-driven, 
community-managed sector reforms were undertaken 
involving Gram Panchayats/ local community in 
planning, implementation and management of 
drinking water schemes. This was later scaled up as 
Swajaldhara in 2002 and was implemented till 2007-08.  
In 2004-05, ARWSP became part of Bharat Nirman 
aiming at full coverage of habitations by 2008-09. The 
ARWSP was implemented till the year 2008-09 of 
Eleventh Plan (2007-12). In 2009-10, it was modified 
and renamed as National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP) with major emphasis on 
ensuring sustainability of water availability in terms of 
potability, adequacy, convenience, affordability and 
equity, on a sustainable basis, adopting decentralized 
approach involving Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
and community organizations. 
In 2013, certain changes were introduced in NRDWP, 
viz. i.) providing focus on pipe water supply schemes; 
ii.) wherever possible, enhancing service level from 40 
lpcd to 55 lpcd; iii.) providing greater thrust on water 
quality and Japanese Encephalitis-Acute Encephalitis 
Syndrome (JE-AES) affected districts; iv.) waste water 
treatment, recycling; and v.) O&M of ageing schemes. 
In 2017, NRDWP was restructured to i.) make it more 
competitive, result-oriented and outcome-based; ii.) 
provide flexibility to states while implementing the 
programme by reducing its components; and iii.) 
providing piped water supply with the only exception 
allowed in JE-AES affected districts.
From 1951 to 2019, efforts were focused on providing 
safe drinking water supply to rural population either 
Background
CHAPTER
through hand pumps, protected wells or piped water 
supply with public stand posts as delivery points. In last 
few decades, as reported by States, viz. Gujarat, Goa, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Sikkim, 
Telangana, etc. have focused on providing tap 
connections to rural households. Of late, many States 
are making concerted efforts to cover all rural 
households with piped water supply.
Under NRDWP, apart from funding regular infrastructure 
for coverage of rural areas, water quality issues were 
also addressed and special project funds were made 
available to States. As part of these efforts, National 
Water Quality Sub Mission (NWQSM) was launched in 
February, 2017 with an objective to make provision of 
safe drinking water to Arsenic and Fluoride affected 
habitations by March, 2021. It envisages that these 
habitations will have access to safe drinking water either 
through piped water supply or short-term measure, i.e. 
community based purification plant with provision of 8-
lpcd for drinking and cooking purposes.
Further, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has 
identified 60 districts in five States, which are affected 
with JE-AES. Department/ National Mission is 
providing special assistance to States for providing safe 
drinking water in these affected districts.
To enable PHEDs/ RWS departments to monitor quality 
of water supply and empower local community to keep 
surveillance on quality of water supplied, Water Quality 
Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) programme is 
under implementation. The activities include setting up 
and up-gradation of State, District and Sub-Division 
level water quality testing laboratories, provisioning of 
mobile laboratories (for outreach and to be used during 
calamity), procurement of Field Test Kits (FTKs), 
periodic monitoring of water quality of various drinking 
water sources and capacity building of grassroot level 
workers for basic water quality tests.
rd
.2   73  Amendment to the Constitution
rd
The 73  Amendment to the Constitution in 1992, 
added a new Part IX to the Constitution titled 'The 
Panchayats' covering provisions from Article 243 to 
(O); and a new Eleventh Schedule covering 29 
subjects within the functions of the Panchayats. Entry 
of this schedule is drinking water, devolving its 
management to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
Further, Panchayats can collect and appropriate 
suitable local taxes and get grant-in-aids to carry out 
aforesaid functions. 
.3   Finance commissions
Successive Finance Commissions have given priority to 
social sectors inter alia water supply in the form of 
State specific grants as well as grants to Panchayats for 
'management of water supply'. Further, water supply 
has been treated as core function of Panchayats. 
Commissions have also recommended recovery of 
user charges for provision of water supply services and 
revision of their rates commensurate with inflation and 
they should at least recover full O&M cost of providing 
these services.  
th
The 14  Finance Commission (2015-2020) recognized 
health, education, drinking water and sanitation as 
public services of national importance and defined 
the sustainable drinking water supply systems as 
'those being operated under a formal management 
model, have 100% household meters installed and 
whose net revenues from water tariffs and subsidies 
are sufficient to cover at least the O&M costs of the 
system'.  It has also recommended 100% metering of 
individual connections in both rural and urban 
households, commercial establishments and 
institutions and individual connections be provided 
only when functional water meters are installed.
th
The 14  Finance Commission also recommended grants 
to local bodies to the tune of Rs. 2 Lakh Crore under 
twin heads of basic and performance grants in 9:1 ratio. 
The basic grant is meant to be used for delivery of basic 
services by GPs which inter alia include water supply, 
sanitation including septage management, sewerage & 
solid waste management, etc.  
.4   Externally Aided Projects (EAPs)
Multi-lateral agencies like World Bank, ADB, NDB as 
well as bilateral agencies like JICA have been funding 
water supply projects in various States. Funding has 
been focused either on bulk water transfer, distribution 
network and/ or promote reforms in the sector in the 
form of community-managed, demand-driven, 
decentralized water supply programmes where Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. plays a key role in the planning, 
implementation, management, operation and 
maintenance of schemes. In the last two decades, focus 
Para 11.59 of the Commission's report
Paras 15.49 and 15.50 of the Commission's report
Background
Further, as on 31.03.2019, as reported by States/ UTs, 
.33% households have tap water connections.
Since 2017, under NRDWP, installation of new hand 
pumps except in JE-AES districts was discontinued. 
Under the revamped NRDWP, objective has been to 
implement piped water supply schemes including 
provision of household tap connections. In view of 
limited availability of financial resources and other 
constraints, states made efforts to provide piped water 
supply predominantly through public stand posts. As 
reported by State Governments/ UT Administration, 
status of household tap connection is at Annex-I. 
has been to implement water supply schemes with 
O&M cost recovery and partial capital contribution so 
that local community owns, manages, operates and 
maintains their own water supply system.
.5   Present status of rural water supply
Under NRDWP, the water supply coverage was 
monitored by taking habitation as a unit.  As on March 
, 2019, out of total reported 17,25,576 rural 
habitations in the country, coverage status is as under:
     (habitaons in numbers)
Service 
level
Fully 
Covered
Parally 
Covered
Quality-
aected
Table 1
Habitaons geng at least 40 lpcd of safe drinking water throughout the year available within 100 meters (horizontal / vercal) from their 
households. 
Parally Covered (PC) Habitaons: Habitaons other than Fully Covered and Quality Aected categories.
Habitaon with at least one of the drinking water sources not meeng parameters of chemical contaminaon (Arsenic, Fluoride, Iron, Salinity, 
Nitrate and Heavy Metals) as spulated in IS:10500 and with remaining safe sources, service delivery level of 40 lpcd is not ensured.
lpcd
,96,304
.92%
,69,661
.63%
,611
.45%
lpcd
,15,523
.26%
,50,442
.28%
,611
.45%
Background
The challenges faced in the drinking water sector are as mentioned in the figure below:
.6   Challenges and SWOT analysis
The 73 Amendment to the Constuon of India 
devolved the responsibility of drinking water supply to 
local self-governments. However, the approach has 
been predominantly engineering/ construcon 
oriented. This has resulted in limited involvement of 
communies in design, planning and implementaon. 
Mulple Government Departments such as water 
resources, public health engineering, urban 
development, groundwater, rural development, rural 
water supply & sanitaon, etc. involved in water sector 
has led to coordinaon challenges.
COORDINATION CHALLENGES 
Lack of responsible consumpon, wastage of water, 
leakages at distribuon & end use points, biological 
contaminaon, over drawl for agriculture, etc. are 
prevalent leading to inecient resource ulizaon. 
As per the latest rainfall stascs of India report, IMD 
states that the seasonal rainfall for the country as a 
whole was less than the normal value. Due to climate 
change, there is a considerable spaal & temporal 
variaon in rainfall resulng in lesser surface storage.
As per CGWB 2018 data, around 50% assessment units 
(blocks/ rkas/ mandals) are found to be contaminated 
with Arsenic, Fluoride, Chlorine, Nitrate and/or Salinity 
due to both geogenic and anthropogenic causes. 
Inadequate infrastructure to raise service levels from 
to 55 Ipcd & provide last-mile connecvity to 
individual households; aging infrastructure; lack of grey 
water management; absence of source sustainability 
measures, viz. rainwater harvesng structures, 
borewell recharge structures, etc. 
Even though the Naonal Water Policy, 2012 
prescribes States to recover full O&M costs of water 
supply systems, except few States, there is inadequate 
nancial allocaon to O&M leading to poor upkeep of 
assets ulmately falling into disuse. 
CHANGING RAINFALL PATTERNS
WATER QUALITY ISSUES
INADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE
POOR O&M
LACK OF RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
LESS COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
SWOT analysis
With numerous challenges, JJM provides an opportunity to carry out SWOT analysis for better planning and 
implementation. The same has been attempted and is as under:
STRENGTH
 Availability of Central and State Finance 
 
Commission grants 
  Wide experience in implemenng PWS in 
 
dierent  
terrains 
  Devoluon of powers to PRIs 
  Availability of separate technical cadre for 
 
planning  
and implementaon
  Availability of technologies for providing safe 
 
water  
 from contaminated ground  
 
water sources 
 Exisng infrastructure 
  Dense habitaons in water abundant places 
WEAKNESS
 Top-down approach and lack of community 
 
ownership/ participatory approach 
 Inadequate nancial resources 
  Non-availability of technical human 
resource at G
 P  
level 
  Poor recovery of service charges/ absence 
of w
 ater  
tariff 
  Poor attention on O&M of completed 
schemes 
  Engineering departmental mindset of on of 
 
infrastructure creation but not on  
functioning as a
   
utility
OPPORTUNITY
 Enabling provision to involve local government 
 
instuons for  implementaon of  
JJM 
 Availability of central funds under JJM and 
 
addional resources through RJJK 
  Involving commied NGOS, CSOs for PRA in 
 
handholding  
implementaon 
 Hiring dedicated HR at dierent instuonal 
 
levels for implementaon
  Applicaon  
of new technologies for ecient 
 
implementaon 
  Exploring partnerships with dierent 
 
stakeholders 
THREAT
  
Growing populaon 
 Uncontrolled drawl of groundwater for 
 
agriculture depleng the sources and increased 
 
chemical contaminaon 
 Water scarcity in some places 
  Climate change and severity of climate events 
  Delay in inadequate provision and/ or transfer 
of S
 tate nances in some States 
 Reluctance of State Governments to devolve 
the l
 ocal water supply schemes to PRIs  
or 
handing o
 ver non-  
funconal schemes 
 Volume of work 
  Lack of capacity at GP level
SWOT 
.1   Vision 
Every rural household has drinking water supply in 
adequate quantity of prescribed quality on regular 
and long-term basis at affordable service delivery 
charges leading to improvement in living standards of 
rural communities.
.2   Mission 
Jal Jeevan Mission is to assist, empower and facilitate:
i.) 
States/ UTs in planning of participatory rural 
water supply strategy for ensuring potable 
drinking water security on long-term basis to 
every rural household and public institution, 
viz. GP building, School, Anganwadi centre, 
Health centre, wellness centres, etc.;
ii.) 
States/ UTs for creation of water supply 
infrastructure so that every rural household 
has Functional Tap Connection (FHTC) by 2024 
and water in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality is made available on regular basis;
iii.) 
States/ UTs to plan for their drinking water 
security;
iv.) 
GPs/ rural communities to plan, implement, 
manage, own, operate and maintain their own 
in-village water supply systems;
v.) 
States/ UTs to develop robust institutions 
having focus on service delivery and financial 
sustainability of the sector by promoting utility 
approach;
vi.) 
capacity building of the stakeholders and 
create awareness in community on significance 
of water for improvement in quality of life;
vii.) 
in making provision and mobilization of 
financial assistance to States/ UTs for 
implementation of the mission.
.3   Objectives 
The broad objectives of the Mission are:
i.) 
to provide FHTC to every rural household; 
ii.) 
to prioritize provision of FHTCs in quality-
affected areas, villages in drought prone and 
desert areas, Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana 
(SAGY) villages, etc.;
iii.) 
to provide functional tap connection to Schools, 
Anganwadi centres, GP buildings, Health centres, 
wellness centres and community buildings;
iv.) 
to monitor functionality of tap connections;
v.) 
to promote and ensure voluntary ownership 
among local community by way of contribution 
in cash, kind and/ or labour and voluntary 
labour (shramdaan);
vi.) 
to assist in ensuring sustainability of water 
supply system, i.e. water source, water supply 
infrastructure, and funds for regular O&M;
vii.) 
to empower and develop human resource in the 
sector such that the demands of construction, 
plumbing, electrical, water quality management, 
water treatment, catchment protection, O&M, 
etc. are taken care of in short and long term; and
viii.) 
to bring awareness on various aspects and 
significance of safe drinking water and 
involvement of stakeholders in manner that 
make water everyone's business.
.4   Components under JJM
The following components are supported under JJM:
i.) 
development of in-village piped water supply 
infrastructure to provide tap water connection 
to every rural household;
ii.) 
development of reliable drinking water 
sources and/ or augmentation of existing 
sources to provide long-term sustainability of 
water supply system;
iii.) 
wherever necessary, bulk water transfer, 
treatment plants and distribution network to 
cater to every rural household;
iv.) 
technological interventions for removal of 
contaminants where water quality is an issue;
v.) 
retrofitting of completed and ongoing schemes 
to provide FHTCs at minimum service level of 
lpcd;
vi.) 
greywater management;
Strategy for 
Planning and Implementation
CHAPTER
vii.) 
support activities, i.e. IEC, HRD, training, 
development of utilities, water quality 
laboratories, water quality testing & 
surveillance, R&D, knowledge centre, capacity 
building of communities, etc.; and
viii.) 
any other unforeseen challenges/ issues 
emerging due to natural disasters/ calamities 
which affect the goal of FHTC to every 
household by 2024, as per guidelines of Ministry 
of Finance on Flexi Funds.
Efforts should be made to source funds from different 
sources/ programmes and convergence is the key.
.5   Strategy
Under JJM, States/ UTs are to plan for achieving 
drinking water security and to provide FHTC to every 
rural household. It may not be feasible for State 
Government/ Department to manage water supply to 
every household and therefore role of Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee/ local community becomes 
critical in planning, implementation, management, 
operation and maintenance of water supply within the 
villages. Moreover, Panchayats have a constitutional 
mandate to manage drinking water. Further, it is 
necessary that within the villages, local community/ 
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. plays the key role for 
O&M, cost recovery, and good governance.
There is a felt need to have community participation, 
ownership and contribution in all decisions pertaining 
to water supply systems. Thus, community led 
partnership with States/ UTs will be the strategy for 
achieving the objectives of JJM. Communities can 
therefore, make the best of this opportunity and 
ensure that every rural household has FHTC delivering 
water in adequate quantity (minimum 55 lpcd) of 
prescribed quality (BIS:10500) and on regular basis as 
may be decided by the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
State Government and its Departments are to play a 
true role of facilitator. This approach will bring long-
term sustainability in the sector.
st
As on 1  April 2019, about 81% of rural habitations in 
the country have access to potable water through a 
wide range of schemes whereas about 46% of rural 
habitations catering to about 54% of rural population 
have piped water supply having provision for atleast 40 
lpcd, which includes household tap connections and 
public stand posts. As reported by States, 18% of rural 
households have tap connections.
India has 20 agro-ecological zones with varying degree 
of annual rainfall and freshwater availability. In 2017, 
out of total 731 districts, 256 with 1,592 blocks have 
been classified as water-stressed. This necessitates the 
need for water conservation efforts including smart 
water management/ practices while planning potable 
drinking water supply.
Under JJM, revenue village along with its habitations as 
enumerated in the Census will be the unit for planning, 
implementation, monitoring, management, operation 
and maintenance. The revenue village unit will include 
all the respective habitations and all scattered 
Blocks represent assessment units as reported in CGWB report on Dynamic groundwater resources of India, 2017
settlements. In the long-term, financial sustainability 
of O&M and institutional arrangement at village level 
will be key to successful continuous service delivery. 
Rural women and adolescent girls spend a lot of time 
and energy in getting water for day-to-day use. This 
results in lack of participation of women in income 
generation opportunities, loss of school days for girls 
and adverse health impacts. JJM is to play a significant 
role in bringing 'ease of living' for rural community, 
especially women. It is necessary for women to lead 
JJM in their villages to meet their need and aspirations.
To achieve the objective of JJM, following strategy may 
be adopted: 
i.) 
re-verification and firming of baseline data of 
household tap connections by States/ UTs 
before March, 2020 and reporting the same on 
Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS) of the Department/ National Mission;
ii.) 
FHTC may be planned to be provided in every 
household with three delivery points (taps), 
viz. kitchen, washing & bathing area and toilet, 
to keep water clean and prevent misuse. Out of 
the three, only one tap per household will be 
funded;
iii.) 
the rural water supply infrastructure created 
over the years is to be dovetailed, retrofitted 
and renovated to provide FHTCs. Priority will be 
accorded to retrofit on-going piped water 
supply schemes and subsequently to completed 
piped water supply schemes providing water 
through stand post; 
iv.) 
in villages with sufficient groundwater 
availability of prescribed quality within the 
village boundary, the same local water source 
will be used; 
v.) 
in villages with functional hand pumps, the 
depth can be deepened if required and can also 
be used as a source to meet the service delivery 
level;
vi.) 
in tribal/ hilly/ forested areas, option of gravity 
and/ or solar power-based water supply 
schemes with low O&M expenditure to be 
explored and preferred. In hills and mountains, 
springs as a reliable source for drinking water 
to be explored;
vii.) 
in hot and cold deserts, innovative approaches 
and possibility technology intervention will be 
explored (further details are elaborated in 
chapter 8);
viii.) 
in villages with sufficient groundwater 
availability but having quality issues, in-situ 
suitable treatment technology may be explored;
ix.) 
in villages falling in drought-prone areas, 
conjunctive use of multiple sources of water 
can be explored such as ponds, lakes, rivers, 
groundwater, supply from long distance, 
rainwater harvesting and/ or artificial recharge;
x.) 
in villages with water quality issues and non-
availability of suitable surface water sources in 
nearby areas, it may be more appropriate to 
transfer bulk water from long distance. Further, 
in drought-prone and desert areas, where it is 
not possible to have water supply through 
conjunctive use, a similar approach to transfer 
bulk water from long distance may be adopted;
xi.) 
in water quality-affected habitations, especially 
with Arsenic and Fluoride contaminants, 
potable water has to be ensured on priority. 
Since, planning and implementation of piped 
water supply scheme based on a safe water 
source will take time, as a purely interim 
measure, Community Water Purification Plants 
(CWPPs) may be taken up to provide 8-10 lpcd 
potable water to meet drinking and cooking 
need of every household residing in such 
villages/ habitations. However, SWSM to 
prioritize such areas for providing potable water 
through FHTC to every rural household by 
March, 2021;
xii.) 
in States with water-scarce/ areas lying in rain 
shadow region with inadequate rainfall, it is 
necessary to plan for regional water supply 
schemes covering both urban and rural areas 
by sourcing water from a perennial surface 
source. It may be noted that under JJM only 
proportional expenditure on rural population/ 
villages with respect to regular water supply to 
be met;
xiii.) 
even though JJM envisages to provide FHTCs to 
every household, in areas having harsh climatic 
conditions, viz. high altitude cold deserts, areas 
facing extreme terrain challenges, sparsely 
populated hot deserts, etc., it might not be 
feasible to provide FHTC to every rural 
household. In such areas, as mentioned in points 
vi.) and vii.), local innovations/ technological 
Strategy for Planning and Implementation
solutions are to be explored to provide up to  8  
lpcd potable water for drinking and cooking 
purposes; and other arrangements for  rest of 
the other domestic uses;
xiv.) 
In peri-urban/ big villages in water scarce areas, 
in order to save the precious fresh water, it is 
encouraged to plan a new water supply scheme 
with dual piped water supply system, i.e. supply 
of fresh water in one and treated grey/ waste 
water in another pipe. There would be only 
single connection to every household from both 
the pipes. The treated grey/ waste water pipe 
would be for non-potable/ gardening/ toilet 
flushing use. Further, the households in these 
areas will be encouraged, as part of IEC,  to use 
the faucet aerators that save a significant 
amount of water, in multiple taps they may be 
using inside their house.
xv.) 
innovative technology is to be explored to 
ensure equitable distribution of water;
xvi.) 
for source recharging, viz. dedicated bore well 
recharge structures, rain water recharge, 
rejuvenation of existing water bodies, etc. 
need to be adopted using watershed/ 
springshed principles, in convergence with 
other schemes such as MGNREGS, IWMP, 
Finance Commission grants, State schemes, 
MPLAD, MLALAD, CSR, etc.;
xvii.) 
in order to enhance recharge of aquifers, 
especially in arid and semi-arid areas, State 
Government need to strengthen/ extend 
existing canal networks and/ or build canals so 
as to transfer surplus flood waters from dams/ 
reservoirs to ponds/ lakes and other water 
bodies and also recharge groundwater during 
monsoon season. For such activities, funds 
from other sources to be dovetailed;
xviii.) 
while planning for water supply schemes/ 
projects involving high lift of water, energy cost 
as well as meeting monthly power bills needs to 
be deliberated upon and policy for meeting this 
requirement to be firmed up by the States/ UTs;
xix.) 
at the national level, there will be National Jal 
Jeevan Mission (NJJM). In the States/ UTs, there 
will be State Water and Sanitation Mission 
(SWSM) and in each district there will be District 
Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM). At the 
village level, in consonance with the 
Constitutional provision there will be Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. Institutional 
arrangements are to be established at all levels 
with linkages and convergence with other 
programmes. (further details on institutional 
mechanism are elaborated  in Chapter 5).
 
Active participation of women at all levels of 
institutional arrangements with special 
emphasis at village level is to be ensured. This is 
key to success of JJM.
xx.) 
State Government to issue a suitable 
notification under Panchayati Raj (PR) Act, if not 
already done, to empower Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. to plan, implement, 
manage, operate and maintain in-village water 
supply system inter alia which includes powers, 
responsibilities, internal processes, composition 
of VWSC/ Paani samiti, etc., power to decide, 
levy, collect water service charges, etc.;
xxi.) 
SWSM will plan quarter-wise and district-wise 
targets in a year and assess fund requirement 
and expenditure;
xxii.) 
SWSM will ensure seamless integration and 
maintain consistency among the State sector 
rural water supply schemes, projects/ schemes 
funded from other sources including Externally 
Aided Projects in the sector and JJM;
xxiii.) 
Village Action Plan (VAP) is to be prepared based 
on the type of scheme to be taken up in the 
village to provide FHTC to every rural household. 
The VAPs of all villages in a district and all DAPs 
of all districts in the State will be aggregated 
along with regional water supply schemes/ bulk 
water transfer and treatment plants based on 
the need to formulate the District Action Plan 
(DAP) and State Action Plan (SAP), respectively. 
Further, State will also prepare an Annual Action 
Plan detailing yearly targets commensurate with 
the annual allocation (further details are 
elaborated in para 3.6). 
xxiv.) 
VAP will be the main document of the village 
for all water supply and related work, and on its 
approval by Gram Sabha, all funds from 
different sources will be dovetailed to 
implement various components of VAP from 
different sources of funds including JJM. No 
work outside VAP will be taken up in the village 
just because separate source of funding is 
available. This will help in optimal utilization of 
resources for focused outputs;
xxv.) 
State Action Plan (SAP) and District Action Plan 
(DAP) will also include other activities taken up 
under different schemes/ programmes to 
achieve long-term water security;
xxvi.) suitable incentive and disincentive mechanism 
is to be built in the policy to discourage wastage 
of water as well as to meet recurring 
expenditure on bulk water transfer, treatment, 
distribution network and household level 
supply. In addition, State Government/ UT 
Administration will facilitate Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. to take decisions on 
user charges for providing household 
connection as well as water supply;
xxvii.) while deciding in-village water supply system, 
three options with possible least cost water 
supply systems will be presented before the 
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. by PHED/ 
RWS Department with complete techno-
economic and socio-economic analysis 
involving community using communication 
tools such as PRA activities, etc. While deciding 
the system and its location, etc., emphasis on 
low O&M cost and capacity of local community 
to operate and maintain the same will be taken 
into account;
xxviii.) data related to functionality i.e., periodicity of 
water supply in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality is to be captured using IoT based sensors 
and iCloud to monitor service delivery at 
household level and take corrective measures 
wherever required;
xxix.) water quality monitoring will be undertaken by 
department through laboratory tests and 
water quality surveillance will be undertaken 
by community through Field Test Kits (FTKs) 
and Sanitary inspection. (further details are 
elaborated at chapter 10)
xxx.) 
States/ UTs in consultation with Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. may 
explore the option of providing 24 X 7 water 
supply so that there will be no need for having 
individual household storage tanks. For this, all 
out efforts will be made in building community 
ownership & trust, awareness on judicious use 
of water and the convenience of having such a 
functioning system;
xxxi.) 
with the provision of FHTCs, additional greywater 
will be generated at household level which will 
need treatment before it can be utilized for 
agriculture and non-potable uses. In many areas, 
the treated greywater can be a reasonable 
source of revenue for the Gram Panchayat and/ 
or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ 
User Group, etc. in which can be utilized towards 
meeting part of O&M expenditure (further 
details are elaborated at Para 6.1);
xxxii.) convergence with PMKVK to be explored on 
priority and continuous basis to meet the huge 
requirement of capacity building of skilled 
human resource such as masons, pump 
operators, plumbers, electricians, motor 
mechanics, etc. for construction and O&M;
xxxiii.) Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs), viz. 
Self Help Groups (SHGs)/ CBOs/ NGOs/ VOs, etc. 
need to be identified and empanelled to 
handhold the community and facilitate the 
participatory approval and implementation, 
management, O&M, etc. of in-village 
infrastructure by the Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc.;
xxxiv.) in many States, Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. have been empowered over the past 
decades to shoulder the responsibility of water 
supply management. However, there are still 
areas where Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. need to be handheld by such 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs). In such 
villages, the services of ISAs are to be utilized; 
xxxv.) in case of regional water supply/ bulk water 
transfer schemes and distribution network, the 
existing procedure will be followed in the 
State/ UT for implementation. However, under 
JJM, preferred option will be EPC mode with 2-
year O&M by the executing agency;
xxxvi.) while finalising the EPC contracts, relevant 
clause in the tender documents is to be 
included mentioning that materials to be 
procured for use in construction by the 
contracting agency should adhere to the 
Strategy for Planning and Implementation
relevant Indian Standards. Further, type of 
material to be used under different terrain/ 
conditions should adhere to the CPHEEO 
recommendations for such conditions, as the 
case may be and as amended from time to 
time. It would be the responsibility of the 
PHED/ RWS Department/ Board/ Corporation, 
etc.  and the agency executing the work to 
ensure the quality of the material used in the 
construction by asking the supplier to get it 
certified from accredited testing agencies/ 
institutions stating that they adhere to the 
standards/ specifications. This aspect would be 
checked and recorded by the third party 
inspection agencies at the time of inspection of 
completed works for making payment;
xxxvii.) for executing the programme expeditiously and 
on such a large scale, there would be a need for 
executing agencies to carry out in-village 
infrastructure work for which centralized e-
tendering mechanism will be adopted to 
discover best rates, best agencies and speed up 
the implementation on such a high scale;
xxxviii.) the following steps will be followed for 
programme implementation:
a.) 
SWSM to prepare different possible unit type 
designs and cost estimates of all water supply 
scheme components like ESR, sumps, washing 
& bathing blocks, etc. based on population, 
profile and soil conditions, etc. considering all 
aspect of programme implementation in the 
village involving Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc.;
b.) 
SWSM will firm up item rate contracts for such 
items/ components and call e-tenders to 
empanel multiple agencies on Engineering 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode. 
This may be valid for 2-3 years;
c.) 
SWSM will decide the maximum number of 
works to be awarded to the empanelled 
agencies based on State's annual target, 
availability of funds, number of projects where 
land acquisition is complete and handed-over 
to the concerned (i.e., land is readily available 
for infrastructure creation), and agency's 
capacity to undertake the works;
d.) 
DWSM and PHED/ RWS Department, in 
consultation with Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. will decide the agency from the 
empanelled list for implementation ensuring 
one village has only one agency for all works;
e.) 
DWSM, in consultation with Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. will award the work to 
the selected agency and enter into a tripartite 
contract, i.e. DWSM, Gram Panchayat and/ or 
its sub-committee and executing agency. In 
case ISA is there, they will also be part of the 
agreement. Since this is a time-bound mission-
mode programme, suitable penalty clause 
need to be incorporated in the contract 
documents so as to disincentivize the agency 
delay in the implementation. Similarly, 
provisions to be made for payment to 
executing agency without any delay;
f.) 
Agency will start the work in consultation with 
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. and 
DWSM, and required support will be provided 
to the executing agency to resolve any conflicts 
arising during the implementation and ensure 
timely completion;
g.) 
on request for release of running payment 
from the executing agency, a combined 
inspection of site will be undertaken by i.) Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc.; ii.) 
PHED/ RWS Department; and iii.) third-party 
inspection agency empanelled by SWSM based 
on criteria developed by DDWS. The agreed 
discussion points will be recorded and signed in 
a separate 'works register' created for this 
purpose with Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. Based on this, PHED/ RWS 
Department. will record the measurements in 
Measurement Book (MB) and process further 
for making payment;
h.) 
on completion of the work, final bill payment 
will be made based on the above prescribed 
procedure and agency will be responsible for 
smooth running of the water supply system 
during defect liability period;
i.) 
once bill for claiming the payment is submitted, 
payment is to be made within 30-45 days after 
third party inspection. In case of delay in the 
suggested criteria for selecon and ToR for third-party inspecon agency placed at Annex-VIII
payment, same penalty clause, i.e. payment 
with interest to be made, responsibility to be 
fixed and recovery to be made;
j.) 
guarantee and/ or warranty of the water supply 
scheme components (machinery, electrical 
items, etc.) will be responsibility of the concerned 
agency. However, its checking/ verification to be 
done by PHED/ RWS Department.
xxxix.) State Government/ UT Administration will have 
a regulation policy for various uses of 
groundwater to restrict the uses within the 
annual replenishable ground water recharge. 
Under JJM, huge sum from public exchequer 
and community is spent and it is to be ensured 
that such investment does not go to waste for 
want of water availability. For this, it is necessary 
to discourage the excessive use of ground water 
for agriculture, industrial purposes, etc.;
xl.) 
concurrent monitoring would be an important 
part of JJM. DDWS will design, maintain and 
monitor an IMIS with a real time dashboard 
capturing physical and financial progress of 
schemes implemented by Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc., DWSM, SWSM, etc. 
(further details are elaborated in chapter 11);
xli.) 
capacity building of various stakeholders 
involved in the implementation of programme 
at all levels will be a continuous activity. 
Reputed institutions with expertise in water 
sector will be engaged and all out efforts to be 
made to mobilize the community effectively.
.6   Planning
.6.1   Action plans at village, district and State level
If a census coded revenue village achieves provision of 
% FHTC to all its households located in all of its 
wards/ habitations/ Mohallas/ Faliya/ Majra/ Chord/ 
Palli/ Kheda/ Tola, etc. then it would be declared as 
% FHTC village. If a district achieves provision of 
% FHTC to all households in all its census coded 
revenue villages, then it would be declared as 100% 
FHTC district. If a State achieves provision of 100% 
FHTC to all households in all its districts, then it would 
be declared as 100% FHTC State.
Village Action Plan (VAP)
A Village Action Plan (VAP) will be prepared by Gram 
Panchayat or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. with support from ISA, PHED/ 
RWS Department, DWSM based on baseline survey, 
resource mapping and felt needs of the village 
community. It will include the following:
i.) 
history of water supply/ availability in the 
village, details of any drought/ scarcity/ cyclone/ 
flood or any other natural calamity pattern; 
history of any emergency arrangements like 
water supply through tankers, trains, etc.; 
history of part works related to water supply, 
source strengthening, general trend of water 
availability, major water-borne diseases;
ii.) 
existing status of village water supply including 
source, water quality issues, if any, and O&M 
arrangement;
iii.) 
current availability of water in water source 
(yield measured) and its long-term sustainability;
iv.) 
need assessment of water required in village 
and the available resources. Based on this, 
decision to be made for construction of Single 
Village Scheme (SVS) or part of Multi Village 
Scheme (MVS);
v.) 
number of existing FHTCs and number of FHTCs 
yet to be provided in all habitations;
vi.) 
willingness including affordability of people to 
contribute towards partial capital cost in cash/ 
kind and/ or labour and regular contribution 
towards O&M;
vii.) 
capacity building of members of Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc., 
barefoot technicians, awareness generation 
among community on judicious use of water 
and change in living standards;
viii.) 
location of proposed water source, washing/ 
bathing places, cattle trough, finalization of 
technology option, implementation schedule, 
long-term O&M plan, etc.;
ix.) 
ensuring availability of land in favour of Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. for construction 
of in-village water supply infrastructure;
x.) 
overall roles and responsibility of Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. and its 
members and linkage with DWSM, SWSM, ISA, 
agency, PHED/ RWS Department;
Suggested format for VAP is at Annex-XA
Strategy for Planning and Implementation
xi.) 
plan for providing water to public institutions, 
viz. school, anganwadi centre, health centre, 
GP building, etc. in the village;
xii.) 
identify barefoot technician for minimal repair 
works, O&M, etc.;
xiii.) 
identify dedicated persons in village to conduct 
water quality tests through Field Test Kits and 
train for the same;
xiv.) 
greywater management measures;
xv.) 
schedule for sanitary inspection;
xvi.) 
water safety and security plan.
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. to ensure participation 
of village community including all its habitations, ISA, 
DWSM, PHED/ RWS Department., etc. in 
. 
Gram Sabha
The VAP will be approved in the 
, when 
Gram Sabha
% of the village community present in the meeting 
agree to the prepared plan. VAP will then be submitted 
to DWSM for further action. Technical approval will be 
accorded by the PHED/ RWS Department/ Board.
District Action Plan (DAP)
DWSM will be responsible for preparation and 
finalization of District Action Plan (DAP) which will 
include:
i.) 
strategic plan for FHTC to all rural households 
by 2024, along with quarterly and annual plan;
ii.) 
aggregation of all VAPs received;
iii.) 
analysis and preparation of database of the 
various components emerging from VAPs;
iv.) 
timelines for all the activities identified for 
FHTCs coverage and financial requirement. The 
overall human resource requirement at 
different levels will be part of DAP including 
their capacity building;
v.) 
identification of villages where water supply 
system will be based on local water source, 
require retrofitting/ augmentation and/ or 
require water supply from surface water;
vi.) 
identification of in-situ traditional harvesting 
techniques/ structures to be revived and 
renovated for augmenting drinking water supply;
vii.) 
estimation of type of water sources, rising 
mains, treatment facilities required, elevated 
storage reservoirs, sumps, water pumps, solar 
panels, distribution network, FHTCs, washing/ 
bathing places, cattle troughs, greywater 
treatment and reuse measures, source 
sustainability measures, etc. required within 
the district and its cost;
viii.) 
identification of number of ISAs required out of 
empanelled ISAs, plan for their deployment 
and ensure availability in the village from the 
start of VAP preparation;
ix.) 
plan for capacity building, training, third party 
inspection, O&M, and IEC activities;
x.) 
identify sources of convergence to meet the 
requirements emerging from VAP;
xi.) 
plan for NABL accreditation of district water 
quality testing lab and identify models for 
block/ village level water quality testing;
xii.) 
overall cost of DAP and timelines containing 
fund requirements and outputs;
xiii.) 
O&M for both in-village as well as regional 
water supply, financial and institutional 
requirement and arrangement;
xiv.) 
submission of final DAP to SWSM;
State Action Plan (SAP)
The State Action Plan (SAP) needs to be prepared with 
an objective of achieving overall state drinking water 
security in such a way; as to avoid arranging water 
supply through tankers/ trains, handpump installation, 
etc. in any village.
The SAP will be prepared and finalized by SWSM with 
the help of PHED/ RWS Department based on DAPs.
i.) 
priority is to be accorded to retrofit existing 
infrastructure, viz. completed piped water 
supply schemes and ongoing piped water 
supply schemes are to be identified, taken up 
and completed in the first two financial years. 
Further, priority is to be accorded to provide 
FHTCs by March, 2021 in water quality-affected 
areas, JE-AES areas, DDP areas, DPAP areas, 
Aspirational districts, and Sansad Adarsh Gram 
Yojana (SAGY) villages;
ii.) 
efforts to be made to improve the water 
availability locally by using rainwater 
harvesting, artificial recharge of drinking water 
sources, through convergence of resources and 
efforts, etc.;
Suggested format for DAP is at Annex-XB
Suggested format for SAP is at Annex-XC
iii.) 
keeping in view DAPs of all districts and 
identifying the regions of the State with surplus 
water, SWSM to decide whether to transfer 
water from surplus regions to scarce regions and 
develop distribution network for regional water 
supply schemes covering multiple villages;
iv.) 
in States with drought-prone and desert areas, 
it is necessary to reserve water for domestic 
needs from multi-purpose reservoirs/ storages 
in consultation with concerned agencies/ 
Departments;
v.) 
the SAP would specifically mention the 
institutional reforms required including 
unbundling the existing water supply 
departments into different agencies focusing on 
specific aspects of water supply, i.e. bulk water 
transfer/ infrastructure development, intra and 
inter-district distribution systems and support 
to village level institutional arrangement;
vi.) 
the said agencies would function as utilities for 
creating infrastructure with focus on specific 
water supply services. For this purpose, SAP will 
specify bulk water tariffs for both accessing the 
water from source and supply from the grid;
vii.) 
SAP would also outline the different financing 
models in the form of Public Private 
Partnership (PPP), i.e. Hybrid Annuity Model 
(HAM), Design Build Operate Own Transfer 
(DBOOT), Build Operate Transfer (BOT), etc.;
viii.) 
SAP should have detailed action plans for 
ensuring functionality of household tap 
connections and Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance (WQM&S). This will inter alia include 
planning for infrastructural requirements of 
water testing laboratories and human resources;
ix.) 
SAP would specifically identify areas (hilly/ 
tribal/ forested/ hot and cold deserts and 
inaccessible areas) that would require innovative 
technological interventions to provide assured 
water supply using renewable energy;
x.) 
on the basis of DAPs, the SAP will plan for 
convergence for source sustainability and 
greywater management measures;
xi.) 
the SAP will further detail the district-wise list 
of GPs/ villages with number of FHTCs provided 
in each village, balance FHTCs to be provided, 
PRA activities, type of scheme to be provided 
(retrofitting/ new SVS/ MVS/ standalone 
schemes for difficult and far-flung areas, etc.) 
preparation of estimates by PHED/ RWS 
Department, implementation schedule, etc.;
xii.) 
it will contain timelines for all the activities 
identified under district-wise FHTCs coverage 
and financial requirement;
xiii.) 
the overall human resource requirement at 
different levels should be part of SAP including 
their capacity building, training, etc.;
xiv.) 
planning at all levels for piped water supply 
requires use of HGM maps/ space technology. 
(further details on technology elaborated at 
chapter 8);
xv.) 
SAP will develop strategies for state-wide 
rejuvenation and cleaning of village water 
bodies/ traditional water harvesting structures. 
Greywater treatment and reuse will form an 
integral part of the water security strategy. 
Protection and preservation of water bodies 
will be helpful in achieving drinking water 
security. For this purpose, SWSM has to decide 
convergence of activities and funds from 
different sources, viz. MGNREGS, IWMP, 
SBM(G), MPLAD, MLALAD, DMDF, etc.
To achieve the national target by 2024, JJM 
will follow a project approach. For this, SAPs 
will be prepared for a period up to 2024, inter 
alia which covers overall strategic plan, 
modalities for implementation, activities to be 
taken up, outputs to be achieved along with 
timelines, annual financial outlay, etc. The 
Strategic plan under SAP will detail source 
sustainability, functionality, monitoring, third 
party inspections for implementation, water 
measurement, greywater management and 
comprehensive O&M plan for the system. The 
SAP will be considered and approved by DDWS 
based on consultations with the respective 
State/ UT. Based on SAP, funding arrangement 
to be made.
Strategy for Planning and Implementation
ii.) an agency to plan and execute the intra and inter-
district water distribution systems for delivery of 
water to Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. as well as to municipal bodies; and 
iii.) a separate agency to empower, support and 
handhold the village level institutions that are part 
of Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. for service 
delivery through FHTCs and for long-term 
management, operation and maintenance.
The States can decide to have at least two agencies of 
their choice out of the aforesaid three, depending on 
their requirement. SWSM would play a crucial role in 
setting up of the said agencies. Such a reform would 
enable the institutions to function as utilities focusing 
on services and recovery of water tariff from consumers 
for meeting the O&M expenditure. 
With the help of Implementation Support Agency (ISA) 
working at village level, model management contract 
may be developed so that water supply services at 
village level can be provided by young entrepreneurs/ 
Self Help Groups on either standalone or cluster-based 
models. The same can be used for greywater 
management. This will help in bringing in newer 
technology, robust management practices and recovery 
of user charges, thus bringing in long-term sustainability.
The State may also create an independent regulatory 
body for the water supply sector that would decide the 
terms and conditions for the water supply service 
provision by various agencies, tariff fixing and 
monitoring its collection and resolving the disputes 
and would also act as a water supply ombudsman so 
that any aggrieved user can approach it for redressal of 
her/ his grievances.
.6.2  Way forward - service delivery and utility  
 
development
The planning for the Mission would be based on the 
long-term plan for the State water supply sector as a 
whole and will address the issues pertaining to water 
security and sustainability of sources and systems. This 
will require the current administrative structure to 
transform from present 'department-based and 
construction or infrastructure development' to 'utility-
based' based approach. There is a need to shift focus 
from water supply infrastructure creation to water 
management, viz. service delivery. The approach, inter 
alia includes sustainable O&M of the systems, 
undertaking water budgeting and audits at regular 
intervals, cost recovery, reducing the energy charges 
by adopting conjunctive use of water as well as use of 
conventional and non-conventional energy specifically 
solar, measuring the water drawl and accounting for 
the same, addressing the grievances proactively, etc.
Further, the long-term plan for the sector needs to be 
firmed up on the basis of the strategy drawn earlier for 
ensuring water availability and financial sustainability. 
For achieving this, institutional reforms like unbundling 
of the existing institutions and assigning water supply 
regulatory function to an independent agency is the 
logical way forward. This will also open private 
investments.
In some states, the existing institutions need to be 
reformed by creating:
i.) 
a dedicated agency for planning of bulk water 
transfer and treatment to deliver potable water 
to urban, rural and industrial use. This utility to 
work on sound commercial principles; 
The Annual Action Plan (AAP) of the State/ UT 
will emerge from the approved SAP firming 
up the physical and financial district-wise 
targets and will be submitted to DDWS/ NJJM. 
The AAP will be approved by DDWS/ NJJM 
based on consultation with the respective 
State/ UT and funds will be released keeping 
in view the achievements under Annual 
Action Plan (AAP).
CHAPTER
he following ongoing programmes under 
T
erstwhile NRDWP are subsumed into Jal 
Jeevan Mission:
.1  Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Project for low income States (RWSSP-LIS)
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low 
Income Sates (Neer Nirmal Pariyojana) was started in 
for a period of six years till March, 2020 to cover 
total population of 78 Lakh across 4 States, i.e. Assam, 
Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh with World Bank, 
IDA assistance. The project objective was to improve 
piped water supply and sanitation services for selected 
rural communities in aforesaid states through 
decentralized delivery systems and to increase the 
capacity of states to respond promptly and efficiently 
to an emergency situation. The objective of RWSSP-LIS 
is to provide household tap connections at 70 lpcd to 
rural households. With the launch of JJM, RWSSP-LIS 
stands subsumed into JJM.
.2  National Water Quality Sub-Mission 
(NWQSM) 
National Water Quality Sub-Mission (NWQSM) is being 
implemented since March, 2017 to provide safe 
drinking water to identified 27,544 Arsenic/ Fluoride 
affected rural habitations by March, 2021 as per 
existing guidelines. 
Since commissioning of piped water supply schemes 
may take 2-3 years, States have been advised to take up 
Community Water Purification Plant (CWPP) schemes 
in Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations as an 
immediate (short-term) measure for providing 8-10 
lpcd of safe water for drinking and cooking purpose 
only. However, States are asked to plan for long-term 
measures in these habitations to provide FHTCs.
States are allowed to use JJM funds for en-route 
habitations, use Externally Aided Projects (EAPs)/ State 
schemes and other funds for convergence to the extent 
of eligibility.
National Water Quality Sub-Mission will come to an 
end on 31 March, 2021. Accordingly, incurring of 
expenditure by States will be allowed till 31 March, 
Schemes/ Sub-missions under 
erstwhile NRDWP subsumed into JJM 
under NWQSM. The balance amount left with the 
States after 31 March, 2021 will be adjusted with JJM 
Release. In case of incomplete schemes, remaining 
expenditure to be borne by respective State/ UT.
In case of piped water supply (surface/ ground water) 
approved under NWQSM, States will take measures to 
provide FHTCs at service level of 55 lpcd to every rural 
household by retrofitting and making it JJM compliant 
by 2021. In case of short-term measures (Community 
Water Purification Plant) approved under NWQSM, 
States will take measures to provide FHTCs at service 
level of 55 lpcd to every rural household by 2021.
.3  Japanese Encephalitis - Acute 
Encephalitis Syndrome (JE-AES) 
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has 
identified 60 districts which are the most affected 
with JE-AES. Funds are allocated to affected States on 
the basis of number of drinking water sources in the 60 
high priority districts and the extent of contamination. 
Earlier, the JE-AES component had 2% of NRDWP 
allocation. However, due to increase in the budget of 
JJM, it will now be 0.5% of the annual allocation to the 
State. Activities will be carried out in JE-AES affected 
districts for providing safe drinking water as per 
existing policy by taking up piped water supply 
(surface/ ground water) schemes to provide FHTCs at 
service level of 55 lpcd. In all completed/ ongoing 
schemes, States will take measures to provide FHTCs at 
service level of 55 lpcd to every rural household by 
retrofitting and making it JJM compliant by 2021.
.4  Swajal
Swajal is being implemented in aspirational districts 
through community designed, implemented, 
maintained and safely managed single village water 
supply scheme as per existing guidelines. The on-going 
schemes under Swajal will continue under the existing 
Swajal guidelines and ensure completion within the 
stipulated time of completion. Any further new 
schemes in these aspirational districts will be taken up 
under JJM. The completed Swajal schemes which do 
not have the provision of FHTC are to be retrofitted 
under JJM.
List of 60 Districts placed at Annex-XII
JM is a time-bound mission-mode programme 
J
and needs robust institutional framework for its 
successful implementation to achieve the stated 
goal. Hence, a four-tier institutional mechanism is to 
be set up at National, State, District and Village level 
as under:
.1  National Level - National Jal Jeevan 
Mission (NJJM)
There will be National Jal Jeevan Mission headed by a 
senior officer with a directorate. The mission will have 
all powers needed for the successful implementation 
of the Mission for long-term drinking water security to 
rural communities. Roles and responsibilities of NJJM 
are as under:
i.) 
will be responsible for implementation of JJM 
and to provide policy guidance, financial 
assistance and technical support to States;
ii.) 
regular monitoring and necessary corrective 
action from time to time;
iii.) 
monitoring of fund utilization at State level to 
ensure expeditious implementation;
iv.) 
carrying out regular functionality assessment, 
evaluation and impact assessment;
v.) 
building partnerships with other institutions 
and programmes to achieve the goal;
vi.) 
coordinate with other Ministries/ Departments 
for convergence;
vii.) 
approval of State AAPs for implementation of 
the mission;
viii.) facilitate States to access funds from external 
sources;
ix.) 
operate Rashtriya Jal Jeevan Kosh (RJJK) and 
mobilize resources;
x.) 
enable cross-learning through sharing of best 
practices, success stories, etc.;
xi.) 
facilitate scaling up of proven innovative 
projects;
xii.) 
promote innovation, research and technological 
development activities;
xiii.) carrying out Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) campaign;
xiv.) 
facilitate capacity building of SWSM, DWSM, 
State engineering departments/ boards and 
their human resources;
xv.) 
coordinate with international agencies and 
explore opportunities for collaboration;
xvi.) engage services of consultants, agencies and 
experts as and when required;
xvii.) recognize and reward performance of various 
stakeholders;
xviii.) carry out associated activities to involve other 
stakeholders like students, youth, women in 
achieving the mission activities.
In addition to the directorate, the NJJM will have the 
following:
.1.1  Data and documentation centre
Under the mission, a Data and Documentation centre 
will be set up to monitor its implementation, collection 
of information from States and to process the 
information. The centre will be primarily served by 
National Informatics Centre (NIC).  The NIC would act 
as IT consultant both at national as well as state level, 
and would be responsible for:
i.) 
management of Integrated Management 
Information System (IMIS) and generating 
required reports for project management and 
intervention;
ii.) 
all the master codes against the parameters/ 
components monitored under JJM and location 
codes will be created by NIC and maintained as 
Central database. The States to follow this 
coding pattern;
iii.) 
at the State level, NIC state unit will extend 
technical support to the MIS programme of the 
state, including development of software 
applications and training as per mutually agreed 
proposals;
iv.) 
dashboard maintenance;
v.) 
monitoring of physical and financial progress 
and functionality of FHTCs to analyze the same 
Institutional Mechanism
CHAPTER
and take action to achieve the objective of the 
mission;
vi.) 
any other IT activities considered and developed 
in future to achieve the goal of JJM.
.1.2  Project Management Unit (PMU)
JJM is being implemented to provide FHTCs to about 15 
Crore rural households which is likely to increase after 
re-verification of baseline data. Since piped water 
supply schemes are to be taken up at village level, the 
quantum of work will increase manifolds. Moreover 
innovative technological solutions have to be found 
out in water scarce and quality-affected areas. Further, 
the mission aims at monitoring functionality of tap 
connections so as every household gets assured supply 
of potable water in adequate quantity on regular basis. 
There will be huge tasks not only for project 
management but carrying out IEC campaign, capturing 
best models, techno-economic analysis of in-village as 
well as bulk water transfer and distribution, treatment 
technologies, greywater reuse, physical and financial 
progress, and timely action to keep the project on 
track. States would also require lot of input on 
technological front and there would be a continuous 
need for techno-economic appraisal of state schemes 
so that cost-effective and sustainable water supply 
schemes are taken up. The mission has also to work on 
various aspects of O&M as well as helping state 
departments/ boards/ corporations to work like public 
utilities with robust grievance redressal mechanisms. 
To shoulder this responsibility at the national level, 
mission will have a Project Management Unit (PMU) 
with specialization in public health engineering and 
techno-economic appraisal on one hand; and soft skills 
like community mobilization, IEC, capacity development, 
training, etc. on the other hand. There will be two teams 
under the PMU, one for technical support and another 
for management support for which suitable sourcing 
mechanism will be worked out. 
The technical support team would provide technical 
support to the States, technical evaluation of project for 
cost-effective implementation and suggest corrective 
actions, development of design templates and costing 
for small standalone schemes, provide assistance to 
pilot innovative solutions to overcome challenges that 
defy normal technological interventions and IoT based 
monitoring systems.
The management support team would provide 
support for project management/ monitoring, apply 
data analysis tools for identifying implementation 
constraints and financial planning, design of IMIS 
reports on the basis of this analysis, identify success 
stories and develop formats to document them, 
monitor performance of ISAs, third party inspection 
agencies, coordinate functionality assessment, 
arrange capacity building programmes, identify 
training needs, study inter-sectoral externalities and 
make policy recommendations for course correction, 
develop strategic IEC material, viz. education material, 
advertisement contents, etc.
.2  State level - State Water and Sanitation 
Mission (SWSM)
The concept of State Water and Sanitation Mission 
(SWSM) started in 1999 for coordination, convergence 
and policy guidance at the State level, headed by Chief 
Secretary of the State. The SWSM may be registered as 
a society as decided by the respective State 
Government/ UT Administration. The State 
Governments would provide necessary powers to the 
SWSM for successful implementation of JJM. The 
existing SWSM may be further strengthened to achieve 
the objective of JJM. SWSM, a state level institution 
headed by Chief Secretary with Principal Secretary/ 
Secretary in-charge of PHED/ RWS Department as 
Mission Director is the organisation responsible for 
implementation of JJM in the state. 
Most of the mission officials will be taken on 
deputation from various departments/ agencies/ 
institutions for time-bound implementation of JJM. 
However, to bring synergy and drive with latest 
knowledge, in addition to regular officials, it will also 
have subject matter specialists on contract. To provide 
specialized support, SWSM can hire consultants for 
which fund provided under support activities can be 
utilized. The existing Water and Sanitation Support 
Organization (WSSO) will be subsumed under the 
SWSM. The structure of the mission and human 
resources will be decided by the State. In addition to 
public health engineers, the mission will also have 
officials/ personnel for project management, finance 
management, IT, IEC, capacity building and training, 
NGO coordination, etc. Depending on the quantum of 
work, and size of the State, following is suggested in 
addition to public health engineers:
i.) 
D i re c to r  i n - c h a rge  o f  st rate g y  a n d 
implementation
ii.) 
Project manager(s) for technical, financial and 
monitoring
iii.) 
Coordinator for Implementation Support 
Agencies (ISAs)
iv.) 
Coordinator for Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC)
v.) 
Coordinator for Capacity Building and Training
vi.) 
Coordinator for Integrated Management 
Information System (IMIS)
vii.) 
Coordinator Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance (WQM&S) 
viii.) Hydrogeologist
ix.) 
any other person, as required.
The SWSM would have i.) Apex Committee, and ii.) 
Executive Committee.
The Apex Committee would be headed by the Chief 
Secretary of the State with Secretaries in-charge of PHE/ 
Rural Water Supply, Rural Development (RD), 
Panchayati Raj (PR), Primary Education, Health, Finance, 
Planning, Information and Public Relations and a 
Government of India representative as members. In 
addition, three experts/ eminent persons working in the 
field of rural water supply, public service, natural 
resource management, community development, etc. 
will also be made members of the Apex Committee. 
Principal Secretary/ Secretary in-charge of PHED/ RWS 
Department will be the Member Secretary. State may 
decide to have an officer with administrative experience 
as Mission Director or Principal Secretary/ Secretary in-
charge of PHED/ RWS Department may also be 
appointed as Mission Director. The Apex Committee will 
meet at least twice a year and if possible, quarterly. 
State has to notify the Member Secretary and Mission 
Director of the SWSM.
The functions of Apex committee are:
i.) 
to provide policy guidance and will be 
responsible for the overall planning, strategizing, 
and implementation of JJM in the State;
ii.) 
responsible for finalization of State Action Plan 
(SAP) to provide FHTC to every rural household 
of the State by 2024;
iii.) 
decide charges for providing FHTC to rural 
household;
iv.) 
decide water service standards;
v.) 
appraisal and in-principle approval of State 
Action Plan (SAP) after discussion with 
Department/ National Mission;
vi.) 
responsible for financial planning including 
ensuring timely utilization of fund and no 
parking of fund;
vii.) 
responsible for coordination among various 
Departments and other agencies for 
convergence; 
viii.) responsible for devolution of powers 
empowering GP/ sub-committee of GP for 
management of in-village infrastructure, if not 
done already;
ix.) 
devolve powers to DWSM to accord 
administrative approval of intra-district and in-
village infrastructure water supply schemes;
x.) 
decide modalities for operation of single nodal 
account;
xi.) 
build suitable incentive and disincentive 
mechanism in the policy to discourage wastage 
of water as well as to meet recurring 
expenditure on bulk water, distribution network 
and household level supply;
xii.) 
bringing about effective policies  & regulations 
for water use by other sectors, abating water 
contamination by industries, agricultural 
practices or mis-management of solid & liquid 
waste by individual households/ institutions;
xiii.) to enforce uniform policy for various uses of 
groundwater within the annual replenishable 
ground water recharge;
xiv.) 
responsible for water allocation;
xv.) 
to firm up State policy on engaging dedicated 
human resource for ensuring water quality 
testing as well as surveillance using Field Test Kits;
xvi.) finalize ToR for various contracts especially 
penal provision for delays and its monitoring;
xvii.) developing O&M strategy and monthly tariff/ 
user charges for ensuring financial sustainability 
of the system/ scheme. To firm up policy on 
O&M accounts and its operation process by GP 
and/ or its sub-committee;
xviii.) to firm up policy on earmarked % of support 
fund for IEC/ BCC activities;
xix.) 
decide action on unauthorized/ unmetered/ 
unaccounted connections to stop continued 
loss of water/ revenue.
Institutional Mechanism
Mission Director will be assisted by an Executive 
Committee consisting of 5-10 members. Engineer-in-
Chief/ Chief Engineer in charge of Rural Drinking Water 
Supply, officers from the related Departments, viz. 
Water Resources, Rural Development & Panchayati Raj, 
Health, Primary Education, Finance, etc. will be ex-
officio members. Experts, not exceeding three, from the 
field of water, rural development, public/ community 
health and hygiene, sanitation, and reputed voluntary 
organizations are to be co-opted as members. 
The executive committee of SWSM will have the 
following functions:
i.) 
support in creation of DWSMs, ensure necessary 
capacity building, regular monitoring of its 
functioning; coordinate with DWSMs, collate 
information, finalize Annual Action Plans (AAPs);
ii.) 
monitoring of physical and financial 
performance and management of the water 
supply projects;
iii.) 
approval for opening a single nodal account and 
ensure PFMS implementation;
iv.) 
prepare and share design of different types of 
schemes with DWSMs;
v.) 
promote/ support innovation, new technology 
wherever feasible;
vi.) 
take up evaluation studies, impact assessment 
studies, R&D activities;
vii.) 
ensure regular updates of JJM physical and 
financial progress on IMIS and validate the same;
viii.) decide rate contracts and empanel reputed 
construction agencies/ vendors through 
centralized tendering for expeditious 
implementation;
ix.) 
empanel partner NGOs/ VOs/ SHGs as 
Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs);
x.) 
engage third party inspection agencies for 
inspection of work before payment;
xi.) 
finalize State Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC)/ Behavioural Change 
Communication (BCC) strategy. Ensure effective 
utilization of the earmarked support fund for IEC 
activity;
xii.) 
prepare capacity building action plan for 
personnel at various levels of the mission and 
monitor its implementation, arrange Training of 
Trainers (ToTs), IEC material use, etc.;
xiii.) ensure that Utilization Certificates (UCs), 
Audited Statement of Accounts (ASA), etc. are 
submitted to Government of India on time;
xiv.) 
sharing of reports, success stories, best practices 
on IMIS and within State and disseminate 
through State social media accounts;
xv.) 
conduct campaigns across State that are 
initiated by both Central and State governments;
xvi.) 
recognize well performing Districts, Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc., ISAs from time-
time and develop policy to encourage them;
xvii.) create and maintain digital inventory of JJM 
assets on a GIS platform;
xviii.) decide on state-specific slogans for introducing 
JJM, wall paintings based on the number of 
houses in a village and areas where it will be 
painted.
In its Annual General Meeting (AGM) following may be 
decided/ approved, 
i.) 
adoption of account;
ii.) 
appointment of auditor for the society from 
CAG empanelled auditors;
iii.) 
performance review of annual plan; and
iv.) 
approval of next year annual plan, etc.
Every State has 'State Level Scheme Sanctioning 
Committee' (SLSSC) which essentially works as State 
level technical committee and the same will be 
(re)constituted/ continued for JJM. SLSSC headed by 
Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Secretary in-
charge of PHED/ RWS Department, as the case may be, 
may have following members:
i.) 
Representative from Department/ Mission, GoI
ii.) 
Mission Director of SWSM
iii.) 
Director, Regional CGWB office 
iv.) 
Director, State water resource/ ground water 
department
v.) 
Director, Regional office of Central Water 
Commission
vi.) 
Technical expert from reputed State and/ or 
national technical institutions
vii.) 
Chief engineer, planning, PHED/ RWS 
department
viii.) Any other member (need based) nominated by 
the State's Chief Secretary 
ix.) 
Engineer-in-Chief, PHED/ RWS department will 
be Member-Secretary
The agenda note for the meeting should be sent to the 
Department/ National Mission at least 15 days in 
advance in order to examine the proposal, firm up its 
views, provide best techno-economic inputs and for 
the representatives to attend the SLSSC meeting. The 
Member-Secretary will convene the SLSSC meeting for 
approval of schemes which are not under the purview 
of DWSM for sanction, viz. intra/ inter district 
distribution networks, regional water supply schemes, 
bulk water transfer through water grids, treatment 
plants, etc. The proposals placed before SLSSC should 
be invariably reviewed by 'Source Finding Committee' 
for availability of potable water in adequate quantity in 
prescribed quality for the scheme design period. The 
members of Source Finding Committee may be 
decided by the SWSM. Every State has delegated 
powers to accord technical sanction to different level 
of officers and the same may be notified for JJM.
.3  District Water and Sanitation Mission 
(DWSM)
At the district level, DWSM is responsible for overall 
implementation of JJM. DWSM will be headed by 
Deputy Commissioner/ District Collector (DC). The 
members would be 
i.) 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) - ZP/ District 
Development Officer/ Chief Development Officer
ii.) 
Divisional Forest Officer 
iii.) 
Project Director in ITDA/ ITDP districts
iv.) 
District Medical Officer
v.) 
District Education Officer
vi.) 
Executive Engineer, Water Resources/ Ground 
Water/ Irrigation
vii.) 
District Agriculture Officer
viii.) District Information and Public Relations Officer
ix.) 
Executive Engineer, PHED/ RWS Department 
(Member-Secretary)
Eminent persons from the field of water management, 
community health, community development, etc. and 
local MP may be co-opted as members. Executive 
Engineer (EE), PHED/ RWS Department will be the 
member secretary. DWSM will convene monthly 
meetings to consider and accord administrative 
approval of the in-village water supply schemes, plan 
protection and preservation of village water sources, 
greywater management, preventing water bodies/ 
sources from getting polluted, etc. Every year, for 
preparation of district annual action plan, views of 
people's representatives such as MP/ MLAs/ chairperson 
of district Panchayat may be solicited.
To support the DWSM, depending on the quantum of 
work, size of district, following Human Resource is 
suggested: 
i.) 
Project manager(s) for technical, financial and 
monitoring
ii.) 
Coordinator for ISAs
iii.) 
Coordinator for IEC
iv.) 
Coordinator for capacity building and training
v.) 
Coordinator for MIS
vi.) 
Coordinator for WQM&S 
The remuneration towards the above technical/subject 
matter experts, if hired on contract basis, will be met 
from overall support activity fund. 
Functions of DWSM will be as follows:
i.) 
ensure preparation of VAP after taking stock of 
each village for FHTCs;
ii.) 
finalize a District Action Plan (DAP) to provide 
FHTC to every rural household by 2024;
iii.) 
provide administrative approval of in-village 
water supply schemes/ projects at district level 
as per the powers devolved by SWSM;
iv.) 
ensure availability of funds for source 
sustainability works and greywater management 
in villages through convergence and projects 
may be cleared only if these components are 
part of DPR;
v.) 
identify villages requiring ISA support, engage 
ISAs from empanelled list and monitor their 
performance;
Institutional Mechanism
vi.) 
provide necessary directions given to PHED/ 
RWS Department for active participation in VAP 
and initiate techno-economic feasibility, 
preparation of DPRs in consultation with Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc.;
vii.) 
approve the Village Action Plans (VAPs) that 
would contain the estimate for in-village 
infrastructure viz. retrofitting or new scheme 
and its implementation timeline;
viii.) finalize unit type designs and approve cost 
estimates finalized by SWSM or PHED/ RWS 
Department, ISA, Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc.
ix.) 
ensure availability of agency from the empanelled 
list based on the annual projected requirement 
emerging from VAPs and award work;
x.) 
engage third party agency for inspection of work 
before payment to the agency;
xi.) 
help in formation of sub-committee of Gram 
Panchayats, i.e. VWSCs/ Paani Samitis/ User 
Groups, etc. and handhold to ensure scheme 
implementation;
xii.) 
coordinate with Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc., collate information, prepare District 
Action Plan (DAP) and submit to SWSM;
xiii.) converge with PMKVK to create a pool of skilled 
human resource to be engaged by Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. for 
creating in-village infrastructure under JJM. The 
payment towards the same maybe met out of 
support funds;
xiv.) 
ensure regular updates of JJM physical and 
financial progress on IMIS and validate the 
same;
xv.) 
monitor and evaluate physical and financial 
performance;
xvi.) 
facilitate deployment of NGO/ VO/ CBO partners 
as Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs);
xvii.) implement IEC/ BCC strategy and ensure 
effective utilization of the earmarked support 
fund for the same;
xviii.) identify individuals to be trained as master 
trainers at State level who will in-turn build 
capacities of Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc.;
xix.) 
upload FHTCs on IMIS after receipt of 
commissioning certificate from Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc.;
xx.) 
approve and share reports, success stories, best 
practices on JJM IMIS and within district;
xxi.) 
conduct all campaigns with respect to JJM 
initiated by both Central and State governments;
xxii.) recognize well-performing Gram Panchayat and/ 
or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ 
User Group, etc. and ISAs from time-time;
xxiii.) analyze data on health indicators, water-borne 
diseases, etc. for corrective action;
xxiv.) arrange exposure visits for Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. functionaries, 
wherever required;
xxv.) ensure state-specific slogans are wall painted in 
prescribed format across villages as part of JJM 
introductory programme;
xxvi.) step-in in times of calamities like drought/ flood;
xxvii.) grievance redressal;
xxviii.) ensuring that all information is placed on IMIS.
.4  Gram Panchayat and/or its sub-
committee, i.e. Village Water and 
Sanitation Committee (VWSC)/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc.
It is envisaged under JJM that the community will play a 
lead role in planning, implementation, management, 
operation and maintenance of in-village water supply 
infrastructure thereby leading to FHTCs to every rural 
household. The willingness of community, reflected 
through 
 resolution and community 
Gram Sabha
contribution, will be the foremost criterion for 
planning of water supply system in villages. 
GP and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ 
User Group, etc. will function as a legal entity as 
envisaged in the 73  Amendment to the Constitution. 
rd
Gram Sabha will decide whether GP or its sub-
committee will carry out the responsibilities of water 
supply management in the village.  Wherever the sub-
committee is chosen, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. it may be headed by Sarpanch/ Up-
Sarpanch/ GP member/ traditional village head/ senior 
village leader as the 
 may decide and 
Gram Sabha
Panchayat Secretary/ Patwari/ Talati may act as 
Secretary. It may consist of 10-15 members comprising 
elected members of Panchayat up to 25% of the 
composition; 
; 
% women members (key to success)
and remaining 25% may consist of representatives of 
weaker sections of the village (SC/ST) proportional to 
their population. Ordinarily, tenure of sub-committee 
may be kept at 2-3 years and 
 during the 
Gram Sabha
JJM period will have option to reconstitute the sub-
committee. In case the tenure of elected members of 
Panchayat in the sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. has ended due to any reason 
then the DWSM may ensure the continuation of sub-
committee till such time the GP is reconstituted. 
Similarly, in States where the elected GP does not exist, 
the sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group may be headed by traditional village leaders/ 
senior village leader as the village council may decide 
and tenure will be specified. For GP or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
State government will issue suitable notification under 
the Panchayati Raj Act. 
If stand-alone water supply systems are planned in 
scattered settlements/ habitations, a user group is to be 
formed in such settlements/ habitations who are to own, 
manage, operate and maintain the water supply system. 
Such user groups will be accountable to Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti, etc. 
JJM fund will not be utilized for any single house/ farm 
house that are far away from village/ habitation.
The Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. will discharge 
the following functions:
i.) 
provide FHTC to every existing rural HH and any 
new HH that may emerge in future, and ensure 
that scattered households located away from 
main settlements also get FHTCs;
ii.) 
ensure preparation of Village Action Plan (VAP) 
for water supply scheme;
iii.) 
plan, design, implement, operate and maintain 
the in-village water supply schemes and decide 
seasonal supply hours;
iv.) 
procure construction services/ goods/ materials 
from agencies/ vendors as finalized by SWSM 
through centralized item rate tendering;
v.) 
mobilize and motivate the community to 
contribute 5% or 10% of in-village infrastructure 
capital expenditure, as the case may be. The 
contribution may be in the form of cash and/ or 
kind and/ or labour;    
vi.) 
supervise construction of in-village infrastructure 
including source sustainability, greywater reuse, 
water conservation measures, etc.;
vii.) 
open bank account/ use existing account of GP 
for community contribution and depositing 
O&M service charge. In case an existing account 
is being used, it should be ensured that a 
separate ledger is to be maintained for 
contribution and incentive; 
viii.) create and maintain register for accounts which 
should reflect community contribution in terms 
of cash and/ or kind and/ or labour; costs 
towards construction; O&M costs/ water tariff 
collection and incentive received;
ix.) 
mobilize community for PRA activities;
x.) 
firm up and collect water tariff/ user charges;
xi.) 
will be responsible for management and regular 
O&M of in-village water supply system including 
local water sources;
xii.) 
record drinking water asset details in GP/ village 
asset register;
xiii.) facilitate trials runs on scheme completion;
xiv.) 
facilitate third party inspection and 
functionality assessment;
xv.) 
hold periodic meetings at least four times in a 
year and maintain minutes/ record of the same;
xvi.) ensure water quality testing using Field Test Kits 
(FTKs), periodic testing at laboratories & 
disseminate the same among community and 
undertake sanitary inspection. Engage/ train 
rural youth/ students/ women to carry out 
these activities;
xvii.) may engage a dedicated person to ensure water 
quality test using FTKs, as per the respective 
State policy;
xviii.) undertake social audit;
Institutional Mechanism
xix.) 
conduct awareness campaigns on judicious use 
of water, come up with mechanisms to ensure 
no misuse of water and ensure prescribed IEC 
campaigns including wall-paintings, etc.
xx.) 
hire/ arrange pump operator, barefoot technician, 
attend regular repair and maintenance work, and 
operate the system.
.5  Implementation Support Agencies (ISAs)
NGOs/ VOs/ women SHGs/ CBOs/ Trusts/ Foundations 
will be referred as ISAs and will play critical role as 
partners in mobilizing and engaging the communities to 
plan, design, implement, manage, operate & maintain 
in-village water supply infrastructure. DWSM will engage 
ISAs from the empanelled ISAs enlisted by SWSM.  
Based on the District Action Plan of five years, the 
number of villages to be covered every year will be 
identified. These identified villages fall under different 
categories, viz. villages requiring only last-mile 
connectivity in terms of distribution network and 
FHTCs, only IEC campaigns on judicious water use, 
O&M support, requiring new schemes, etc. and will be 
grouped for engaging an ISA for handholding support. 
Accordingly, number of ISAs required every year is 
identified for each of these categories along with 
timeline. For new schemes, each ISA would be 
responsible for the entire project cycle of maximum 18 
months in 40-60 villages at a time. 
Depending on the requirement in the district and 
based on the performance of ISA, next set of 40-60 
villages will be given to them after four to six months or 
engage another ISA. In the district, there could be many 
ISAs depending upon the need of work to be done and 
requirement of handholding. Planning should be done 
in such a manner that JJM is implemented in mission-
mode and all villages of districts are covered with 
FHTCs to all rural households by 2024.
ISA to facilitate women participation at all levels of 
planning, implementation, management, operation 
and maintenance of in-village water supply systems 
and contribution.
For delivery of results, ISA will be provided financial 
support to engage a team comprising of 6-8 members 
and conduct project activities. Once an ISA is selected 
by DWSM, it has to prepare the action plan for the 
villages it is allotted for entire scheme cycle with the 
help of PHED/ RWS Department and clearly specifying 
quarterly outputs. This plan will be in-line with the 
List of 60 Districts placed at Annex-XII
scheme cycle suggested by SWSM. Payment to ISA will 
be linked to the time schedule and outputs on 
quarterly basis. The payment to the ISA would be made 
out of support funds.  
ISAs will carry out following functions:
i.) 
facilitate constitution of sub-committee of 
Gram Panchayat, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. and arrange to build capacities of its 
functionaries;
ii.) 
handhold Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. in all the functions mandated in para 5.4 inter 
alia includes opening bank accounts, 
mobilization of community contribution, O&M 
arrangement, organizing Gram Sabha, organizing 
meetings of sub-committee, facilitating 
resolution in Gram Sabha and acceptance of 
village scheme, facilitating sanitation and 
greywater management activities, etc.;
iii.) 
need assessment of FHTCs and motivate 
communities to have FHTCs;
iv.) 
act as coordination platform between DWSM 
and VWSC;
v.) 
use Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) tools for 
community mobilization and carry out need 
assessment;
vi.) 
assisting the community in water campaigns 
initiated by Government of India/ state 
Government;
vii.) 
build awareness on various aspects of water 
such as rain water harvesting, artificial recharge, 
water quality, water-borne disease, water  
saving, water handling, drinking water source 
augmentation/ sustainability aspects, etc.;
viii.) document and upload success stories from 
villages;
ix.) 
ensure wall-paintings are done at the proper 
places in villages;
x.) 
carry out Social Behavioural Change 
Communication (SBCC) activities. 
.6  Public Health Engineering Department/ 
Rural Water Supply Department
The Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)/ 
RWS Department as decided by State Government will 
be the line/ nodal Department for the implementation 
of JJM in the State. Its role for creation of in-village 
infrastructure and infrastructure (distribution network/ 
regional water supply grid) for multi-village schemes is 
given in para 6.2 of the guideline. It is important to note 
that although PRIs are the owners and managers of the 
in-village infrastructure, the preparation of design, 
estimates, tendering, technical handholding and 
ensuring the quality of work execution will be the 
responsibility of the Department. They would also be 
providing guidance for fixing the tariff for recovery by 
PRIs from village households, coordinate with other 
Departments for source sustainability and greywater 
management, data entry in IMIS, data handling, etc. 
In every State, the SWSM will identify the engineering 
Department/ Board/ Agency to handle JJM. The role of 
this Department/ Board/ Agency in in-village 
infrastructure is as follows:
i.) 
participate in PRA activities, firm up need 
assessment of villages, and provide technical 
help in preparation of VAP;
ii.) 
provide scientific and technical inputs to Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. in 
identifying drinking water sources;
iii.) 
ensure certification of source selected by Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. for its 
quantity & quality in a sustainable manner by 
involving Hydrogeologists/ ground water 
officials concerned;
iv.) 
identify existing assets that can be retrofitted;
v.) 
prepare design estimates and provide technical 
approval for in-village infrastructure for 
consideration & acceptance by Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc.;
vi.) 
obtain statutory/ legal and other clearances for 
execution of works, wherever required;
vii.) 
in case of MVS, plan, design, implement, 
operate and manage bulk water transfer, 
treatment and distribution network including 
source development and ensure that water is 
transferred up to sump in village;
viii.) 
in case of water quality-affected areas, ensure 
that appropriate water treatment technology is 
used and safe water is made available for supply;
ix.) 
entry in MB and preparation of running bills;
x.) 
carry out trial run and facilitate scheme 
commissioning;
xi.) 
capture details of assets existing/ created and 
geo-tag them;
xii.) 
ensure linking of existing FHTCs to head of the 
household through Aadhar as part of baseline 
mapping;
xiii.) provide design for a fenced 'water work' 
complex housing the in-village infrastructure 
and suggest suitable name as per local context.
.7  Sector partners
Sector partners are organizations like UN agencies, 
international developmental agencies, foundations/ 
trusts/ NGOs/ CBOs/ corporates with CSR funds, etc., 
proactively working in the water sector with wide 
outreach and impact. They are expected to play a huge 
role in supporting implementation of JJM given their 
wide experience. Their facilitating role will help in 
improved access to safe drinking water in rural areas of 
the country. Partners at Centre, State and district levels 
to be identified based on their capacity to contribute to 
the Jal Jeevan Mission.
Similar sector partners would be identified at State 
level. Department/ National Mission, States will 
partner with Sector Partners for HR support, designing 
campaigns, capacity building of JJM institutional 
mechanisms, innovating technology, management, 
monitoring, etc. 
These partners may include:
i.) 
UN and other international Development 
organizations;
ii.) 
business & industry with CSR funds;
iii.) 
community-based organizations;
iv.) 
knowledge and R&D institutions;
v.) 
advocacy partners;
vi.) 
training/ skill development institutions;
vii.) 
university/ technical institutions.
The sector partners will assist to:
i.) 
provide specialized HR support at SWSM/ 
DWSM levels in discharging their functions;
Institutional Mechanism
ii.) 
plan for capacity building of various functionaries 
associated with JJM by preparing proper content, 
schedules, compendiums for training;
iii.) 
design IEC/ outreach campaigns;
iv.) 
document and disseminate information on 
best practices on community management, 
technological innovations, water conservation, 
etc;
v.) 
facilitate organization of workshop, conferences, 
seminars, etc. as required from time to time. 
Wherever Department/ National Mission is 
involved in workshops, conferences, etc. that are 
being organized by sector partners, funds may be 
provided under JJM from support fund for the 
same based on actual needs.
.8  National Centre for Drinking Water, 
Sanitation and Quality (NCDWSQ)
National Centre for Drinking Water, Sanitation and 
Quality, Kolkata has been established as an 
autonomous Institution of the DDWS, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, with aim to work in the areas of identification, 
mitigation and management of drinking water quality 
and sanitation related problems in the country with a 
special focus on Arsenic and Fluoride, and to provide 
inputs for policy making. It will serve as a Centre of 
Excellence for water and sanitation handling complex 
water management issues in a holistic and integrated 
manner. It will be further strengthened to play a larger 
and meaningful role in the implementation of JJM.
al Jeevan Mission is a time-bound mission-mode 
J
programme to ensure every rural household has a 
Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) by 
to provide drinking water in adequate quantity 
(minimum 55 lpcd) of prescribed quality (BIS:10500) 
on regular basis. FHTC may be planned to be provided 
in every household with three delivery points (taps), 
viz. kitchen, washing & bathing area and toilet, to keep 
water clean and prevent misuse. Out of the three, only 
one tap per household will be funded under JJM.
In this regard, State Governments/ UT Administration 
will implement the mission based on the finalized State 
Action Plan (SAP) with timelines to cover all the villages 
of the respective State/ UT. Each village will be 
assessed on existing water supply infrastructure by 
DWSM in consultation with Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc., and ISA. Based on the same, FHTCs will be 
provided to every rural household by creating in-village 
water supply infrastructure including source 
development under any one of the following suggested 
categories, viz. 
i.) 
retrofitting of ongoing schemes taken up under 
erstwhile NRDWP for the last mile connectivity;
ii.) 
retrofitting of completed rural water supply 
schemes to make it JJM compliant;
iii.) Single Village Scheme (SVS) in villages having 
adequate groundwater/ spring water/ local or 
surface water source of prescribed quality;
iv.) Single Village Scheme (SVS) in villages having 
adequate groundwater that needs treatment;
v.) 
Multi Village Scheme (MVS) with water grids/ 
regional water supply scheme; and
vi.) mini solar power-based piped water supply in 
isolated/ tribal hamlets. 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has identified a 
list of Q (Quantity)& Q (Quality) blocks which have 
groundwater in adequate quantity of prescribed 
quality. In villages where groundwater/ surface water/ 
spring water is available both in terms of Q&Q, the 
States are advised to undertake single village schemes 
based on these sources. Multi Village Scheme is 
suggested to be taken up in those blocks, which do not 
fall under Q&Q blocks.
Broadly, water supply infrastructure work will fall in 
two categories, i.e. 
i.) 
creation of in-village infrastructure including 
source development/ strengthening / 
augmentation and greywater management; and 
ii.) 
infrastructure for bulk transfer of water, 
treatment and distribution systems. 
Single Village Scheme (SVS) is a groundwater/ spring 
based/ local surface water scheme, which is planned 
and managed by Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
Multi Village Scheme (MVS) is a ground water/ surface-
water based scheme that caters to multiple villages 
and is usually planned by PHED/ RWS Department/ 
Board/ Agency, wherein Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. will manage, operate and maintain the in-village 
water supply system.
SWSM will accord priority to retrofit existing 
infrastructure, viz. completed piped water supply 
schemes and ongoing piped water supply schemes that 
are to be completed in the first two years. Further, 
priority will also be accorded to provide FHTCs in water 
quality-affected areas especially Arsenic and Fluoride, 
DDP areas, DPAP areas, and SAGY villages.  
In-village infrastructure development and management 
will be the responsibility of Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. supported by PHED/ RWS Department/ agency and 
ISA, whereas infrastructure for bulk transfer of water 
and distribution systems up to the village boundary will 
be the responsibility of PHED/ RWS department/ 
board/ corporation, as the case may be.
The PHED/ RWS Department would play a key role and 
provide hand holding support to Gram Panchayat and/ 
or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. in all technical aspects. It would conduct 
the test and certify the yield of the source both from 
quantity and quality point of view, prepare the design 
estimate and help the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
Implementation
CHAPTER
Dynamic Groundwater Resources of India, 2017 -  published in 2019
Groundwater quality in willow aquifers in India, 2018
List of these Q&Q blocks are hosted at JJM portal
to identify the agency for execution, supervise the 
quality of work implemented, get the work inspected 
by a third party, facilitate the measurements of works 
implemented and prepare the running bills for 
payment, conduct the trial run and commission the 
scheme.  In villages where Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. is unable to execute the work, the PHED/ RWS 
Department will carry out the task after design 
estimate, etc. are presented to 
 and its 
Gram Sabha
approval. However, management, operation and 
maintenance will be the responsibility of Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc.
In case, the village is to be covered under MVS, the 
PHED/ RWS Department would ensure the delivery of 
water from distribution system in to the sump of the 
village. The role of PHED/ RWS Department for 
construction of in-village infrastructure would remain 
the same for both SVS and MVS.  
For implementation of in-village infrastructure, SWSM 
would identify the specific number of engineering 
structures (like ESRs, Sumps, cattle troughs, washing/ 
bathing blocks, etc.) to be taken up and approve their 
type designs after its presentation in 
 and 
Gram Sabha
its approval. It would finalize contracts in Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode and 
empanel multiple agencies for execution of these 
identified structures. Each empanelled agency will be 
allowed to take up specific number of villages to be 
covered in specified time which can be decided by the 
SWSM. The tendering for empanelling and fixing cost is 
to be done at State level, but orders for in-village 
infrastructure development to be placed by DWSMs.
As the mission is spread over five years period, states 
can also plan EPC contracts in phases, depending on 
the number of villages to be covered in each phase. 
Since this is a time-bound mission-mode programme, 
suitable penalty clauses needs to be incorporated in 
the contract documents so as to disincentivize the 
agencies to avoid delay in implementation. For all 
works third party inspection and certification before 
payment is mandatory. 
.1 In-village water supply infrastructure
To provide FHTCs to all rural households, in-village 
water supply infrastructure will be created through 
Single Village Scheme (SVS)/ Multi Village Scheme 
(MVS)/ solar power-based stand-alone schemes for 
scattered areas. The Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
will be responsible to plan, implement, manage, 
operate and maintain in-village water supply 
infrastructure and water resources including greywater 
management to meet drinking and domestic needs. It 
will include protection of drinking water source(s) as 
well as treatment and reuse of greywater.
For every Village, Village Action Plan (VAP) for providing 
FHTCs to all households will include cost estimates, 
implementation schedule, O&M arrangement, 
contribution from each household towards partial 
capital cost and O&M, type design of ESR/ sumps, 
washing and bathing complex with a toilet for poor 
landless families, cattle trough, greywater management, 
source sustainability measures, plan to maintain all 
water bodies in village, etc. The VAP will plan for piped 
water supply in scattered settlements as per the 
requirement. The format for preparation of VAP is at 
Annex XA which can be further modified as per local 
requirement. The VAP under JJM will be integrated with 
Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP).
The 
 would decide the type of water supply 
Gram Sabha
scheme to be provided in the village based on socio-
economic analysis and at least 3 techno-economic 
feasibility options provided by PHED/ RWS Department. 
While deciding, the ISA and PHED/ RWS Department 
would provide information about the O&M expenses 
including expenses on electricity for the preferred water 
supply schemes, which has implications on community 
contribution for capital cost as well as O&M. While 
selecting the best techno-economic options, capital as 
well as O&M expenditure have to be kept to the 
minimum. It will be the responsibility of DWSM/ SWSM 
to ensure that no over-designing is done and public 
money is optimally utilized. Technical specification for 
the various components of in-village water supply 
infrastructure will be made available in regional 
languages so that wards/ Panchayats can also access 
these. For this, PHED/ RWS Department and/ or ISA 
would undertake demand assessment, introduce JJM 
using various IEC tools, carry out PRA activities to enable 
community to decide the type of scheme. 
ISA to motivate village community to participate in 
Gram Sabha
Gram Sabha
 and the majority members of 
 
would adopt a resolution for taking up the scheme, and 
on the basis of this, the PHED/ RWS Department would 
prepare the estimate for in-village infrastructure for 
approval by DWSM. The Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. PHED/ RWS  Department would award the work to 
any of the empanelled agency for execution after the 
approval by DWSM.
The service level of potable drinking water supply 
should be at least 55 lpcd. States may enhance the 
same to higher level depending on availability of 
drinking water sources for which additional financial 
resources that may be required, will be met by the 
State government or local community or donors. In 
addition to this, cattle troughs may be constructed to 
provide drinking water to livestock especially in hilly 
terrain, drought prone and desert areas.
For SVS schemes, the in-village piped water supply 
infrastructure will consist of development/ 
augmentation of drinking water source, source 
sustainability measures, water treatment plant (in 
case, source is quality-affected), pumping arrangement 
(preferably solar powered), Over Head Tank (OHT)/ 
underground sump and distribution network leading to 
FHTC. Water supply from each ESR to be measured 
using modern sensors based IoT solutions.
For MVS schemes, the in-village piped water supply 
infrastructure will consist of pumping arrangement, 
OHT/ underground sump, pipeline for water supply, 
distribution network leading up to FHTC and bulk 
meter/ sensor based to measure the water supplied. 
The energy/ power requirements to operate the water 
supply system, if any at village level, also fall under in-
village infrastructure. Conjunctive use of solar power-
based pumping system will be explored to reduce the 
recurring energy cost of rural water supply system.
The cost estimates for in-village water supply system 
will also include:
i.) 
borewell recharge structure, in case of local 
groundwater source;
ii.) 
washing and bathing complex for poor, landless, 
in SC/ ST habitations (need based);
iii.) cattle troughs (purely need based);
iv.) green fenced premises housing the in-village 
water supply infrastructure, viz. ESR/ sump, pump 
operator room, community water treatment plant 
(if any), etc. An appropriate name suiting the local 
culture will be decided by SWSM. For example, it is 
called 'Jal Devalayam' in Andhra Pradesh;
v.) 
sign board of 8 X 6 ft. to be erected at a conspicuous 
location(s) giving all relevant details of the scheme, 
viz. JJM logo, total cost of scheme, implementing 
agency/ vendor, names & contacts of EE/ JE/ Paani 
Samiti chairperson and Secretary, commencement 
& completion date, etc. This is necessary to ensure 
transparency and keep the whole village 
community informed about the programme.
In villages where there is an existing functional piped 
water supply system, it needs to be retrofitted to 
provide FHTCs as follows:
i.) 
existing/ ongoing schemes that provide service 
level of minimum 55 lpcd through public stand-
posts/ hand pumps, retrofitting will consist of 
distribution network, augmentation of supply, and 
other infrastructure like greywater management, 
leading to FHTCs;
ii.) 
existing/ ongoing schemes that provide service 
level of 40 lpcd through public stand-posts/ hand 
pumps, retrofitting will consist of drinking water 
source development/ augmentation, supply 
system augmentation to increase service level to 
minimum 55 lpcd and distribution network, 
greywater management, leading to FHTC.
Long-term sustainable planning of drinking water 
sources and schemes ensure safe drinking water 
availability even during distress period. The main aim 
of source sustainability is to ensure that water supply 
scheme function throughout its full design period. This 
is achieved through sustainability measures like rain 
water harvesting, artificial recharge, etc. For 
groundwater based sources, borewell recharge 
structures will be part of the estimate. For surface 
water based SVS, source sustainability measures like 
watershed management, water conservation, etc. 
must be taken up through convergence. Rain water 
harvesting structures in all public institutions will also 
be ensured, especially in water-stressed areas. 
-70% of the total water supply in rural areas emerges 
as greywater from the households. This broad category 
includes post-use water like bathing, washing dishes, 
laundry, kitchen, etc. When harnessed with the right 
treatment techniques, greywater becomes a useful 
resource for agriculture & other non-potable uses. 
Greywater management is a key component under JJM 
and the collection, treatment and reuse will form part of 
Village Action Plan and in-village infrastructure. The funds 
Implementation
for this may be utilized under convergence as mentioned 
in para 6.3. Fund for this component can be sourced from 
Swachh Bharat Mission and contribution from donors, 
CSR and MPLAD/ MLALAD to be encouraged. This will 
send right message about its proper management and its 
role in keeping villages clean.
In most of the villages in arid and semi-arid areas, soak 
pit will be a preferable option for disposal of greywater 
emerging from households. These waters can be used 
for adding greenery to village ambience and to also 
produce fruits for household consumption. Hence, it is 
suggested to plant i.) a tree for increasing green cover 
& shade; and ii.) fruit bearing tree around these 
structures, subject to availability of land. ISA should 
assist the VWSC and this should also be made part of 
IEC activity for dissemination and practice by individual 
households. 
.1.1  Scheme cycle
Ordinarily, in-village water supply infrastructure 
development may take 12 to 18 months. The same can 
be divided into following three phases:
i.)  
planning and mobilization phase;
ii.)  
implementation phase;
iii.) 
post-implementation phase.
For single village schemes, the scheme cycle can range 
between 12 to 18 months from the day of G.P resolution.
Planning and Mobilization phase (3-6 months)
The planning and mobilization phase commences from 
the time DWSM identifies to take up JJM in a particular 
village till the estimate for implementation of in-village 
infrastructure is approved by DWSM. This phase will 
consist of the following identified activities:
Agency responsible
Baseline mapping of existing FHTCs
Identify villages to be taken up under JJM
Assigning of ISA, PHED/ RWS Department official to villages
Workshops for ISAs on JJM implementation
Community familiarization with the objectives of JJM through IEC 
campaigns in coordination with PHED/ RWS Department
GP resolution for taking up JJM in village
Constitution of sub-committee of Gram Panchayat, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc.
Undertake PRA activities
Capacity building of Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, 
i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. functionaries
Preparation of VAP
Approval of VAP
Preparation & finalization of design and estimates and technical 
approval as per existing departmental procedures
Administrative approval of estimates
Determination of community contribution and its 
deposition in the bank account
Obtaining necessary statutory clearances
Award of work and issue of contract 
Planning for work execution
Activities
DWSM
DWSM
DWSM
DWSM
ISA
GP/ Gram Sabha
GP/ Gram Sabha
GP & ISA
ISA
GP/ PHED/ RWS Department 
Gram Sabha
PHED/ RWS Department
DWSM
GP
DWSM
PHED/ RWS Department & GP
PHED/ RWS Department & GP
Note: DWSM to prioritize villages that have successfully completed the planning and mobilization phase early.
Table 2
Agency responsible
Activities
Testing for yield  and quality 
Development/ augment of source
Creation of infrastructure for water supply till 
FHTC including source sustainability 
Entry into MB and preparation of running bills
Greywater management works (to be executed in parallel with above) 
Enabling payment post third party inspection
Geo-tagging of assets
Create and maintain register for accounts 
Trial runs
Installing water measurement devices, i.e. meter or 
sensor and integrating the same in IMIS
Fixing & collection of O&M costs/ water tariff
Scheme commissioning
PHED/ RWS Department
GP & PHED/ RWS Department
GP & PHED/ RWS Department
PHED/ RWS Department
DWSM & GP 
DWSM & GP
PHED/ RWS Department
GP & PHED/ RWS Department
GP & PHED/ RWS Department
DWSM, PHED/ 
RWS Department, GP
GP
GP & PHED/ RWS Department
Table 3
Implementation phase (6-12 months)
The implementation phase commences from award of work and start on the ground to commissioning of the 
scheme.
Post implementation phase (3-4 months)
The post-implementation phase commences once the scheme is commissioned. 
Wherever the agency responsible is Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ 
User Group, etc., ISA is by default involved.
In many villages, Gram Panchayats are very active and 
its sub-committees, i.e. VWSCs/ Paani Samitis/ User 
Groups, etc. have already been formed under erstwhile 
programmes like sector reforms, Swajaldhara, etc. In 
those villages where the sub-committees are 
functional, DWSM may decide to directly go for 
implementation phase and need for ISA may also be 
dispensed with.
.1.2  Community contribution
For in-village piped water supply infrastructure and 
related source development to be implemented by Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc., communities will contribute 5% 
of the capital cost in cash and/ or kind and/ or labour in 
Agency responsible
Activities
Water supply, O&M and water tariff collection 
Management of greywater 
Interaction with other well performing 
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee 
Continuous capacity building of Gram Panchayat and/ 
or its sub-committee
Handing over incentive fund to Gram Panchayat and/ 
or its sub-committee
GP 
GP 
DWSM/ SWSM
DWSM
DWSM
Table 4
Implementation
hilly and forested areas, NE and Himalayan States and 
villages having more than 50% SCs and/ or STs 
population; and 10% of the capital cost in other villages.
Willingness of the community and contribution as 
mandated under JJM from at least 80% households of 
the village is a pre-requisite for taking up water supply 
scheme. Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, 
i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. may consider 
exempting individual contribution from poor, infirm, 
divyangjan or widow with no source of steady income. 
However, this is an exception rather than a rule.
In order to reduce the burden of community to make 
upfront contribution in cash, Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. may allow individual households to pay in 
installments. Contributions from local Institutions, 
philanthropists, community-based organisations to be 
encouraged. However, such contribution will not be part 
of the community contribution. This will be taken as 
contribution towards overall cost of the scheme. 
Similarly, contribution from MPLAD, etc. will be counted 
as Central share, MLALAD, etc. will be counted as State 
share, DMDF as State share and other donations part of 
the overall cost. Contribution made by local Self Help 
Group (SHG) will form part of the community 
contribution. (This is further elaborated at para 7.11)
For on-going erstwhile NRDWP schemes, there will not 
be any community contribution towards the capital 
cost. However, while retrofitting to make them JJM 
compliant, community is to contribute 5% or 10% of 
the capital cost, as the case may be, in terms of cash 
and/ or kind and/ or labour towards the cost of 
retrofitting/ augmentation and/ or additional items 
like cattle trough, bathing and washing blocks, rain 
water harvesting, etc.
.1.3  Incentive for community
The community would be rewarded/ incentivized in a 
phased-manner after the commissioning of the 
scheme to the tune of 10% of the capital expenditure 
on their respective in-village water supply scheme. This 
would serve as a 'revolving fund' to meet emergency 
repair/ maintenance of the scheme, which will be 
replenished by the user group/ local community.
.1.4  Operation & Maintenance (O&M)
Operation & maintenance is important for ensuring 
functionality of household tap connections. O&M 
would involve recurring costs like electricity charges, 
chemical costs, expenditure on preventive and 
breakdown maintenance, remuneration of pump 
operator, etc. The community therefore has a key role 
to play in aspects such as:  
i.) 
using the revolving fund received from 
government judiciously; 
ii.) funds received as part of Finance Commission 
recommendation;
iii.) arranging operation of the system through a 
barefoot technician;
iv.) carrying out minor repairs;
v.) 
chlorination;
vi.) water quality testing/ surveillance;
vii.) ensuring proper use of infrastructure, cleanliness 
near sources, etc.
Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. will open an account to 
receive funds for O&M from different sources such as 
incentive fund from JJM, Finance Commission grants and 
community contribution to meet the recurring charges.
Management and O&M of the water supply scheme by 
the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc., recovery of user 
charges and full O&M recovery will form the cornerstone 
of the long-term sustainability of the scheme.
.2  Regional water supply and distribution 
network
In villages with water quality issues and paucity of 
surface water sources, especially in drought-prone and 
desert areas, to achieve water security bulk water 
transfer from long distances is a reality. Further, in 
drought-prone and desert areas, where it is not possible 
to have water supply through conjunctive use, a similar 
approach to transfer bulk water from long distance will 
be adopted. In States with water-scarce/ areas lying in 
rainshadow region with inadequate rainfall, it is 
necessary to plan for regional water supply schemes 
covering both urban and rural areas of this region by 
sourcing water from a perennial surface source. 
Since the water is transferred from long distance at a 
very high cost, it is essential to have least loss of water 
during transmission. For this purpose it is necessary to 
have District Metering Area (DMA) with SCADA 
systems and/ or sensor-based mechanism to reduce 
non-revenue water.
Bulk water transfer/ multiple village schemes have 
higher per capita & maintenance costs, and require 
skilled human resources. Hence, the States have to 
judiciously plan these works, preferably as a last 
option, keeping in view the availability of resources 
and future O&M expenditure.
The schemes needing transfer of water will be planned, 
implemented and monitored by the PHED/ RWS 
Department/ Board/ Agency as decided by the SWSM/ 
State Government. However, the in-village water supply 
infrastructure of such schemes will be the responsibility 
of the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. for which PHED/ 
RWS Department and Implementation Support Agency 
(ISA) will facilitate the same. Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. will pay bulk water charges to the supplier of bulk 
water as decided by the State Government or regulator, 
as the case may be.
The components for transfer of water consists of head 
work, intake work, tube well, pumping station, trunks/ 
mains/ lateral distribution network, treatment plants, 
Elevated Storage Reservoir (ESR), sumps, bulk meters, 
substations for handling bulk water supply, etc.  
For Bulk water transfer/ regional water supply schemes 
covering multiple villages, individual EPC contract can 
be awarded in phases depending on number of such 
works to be taken up under the mission.
Some of the States like Gujarat, Telangana, Karnataka, 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra have either established 
water grids/ surface water based large schemes or 
planning to take up such schemes to provide drinking 
water to all villages using surface water.  
The States should diligently follow the CPHEEO norms 
for design, operation and maintenance of such mega 
schemes. The schemes should have the provision for 
bulk water meter at the delivery point, i.e. sump of the 
village/ habitation. 
In case of MVS schemes, extent of land acquisition 
required, its schedule and cost along with timelines for 
various stages of acquisition needs to be given in the SAP. 
For in-village water work, land is to be provided by the 
Gram Panchayat. In case, such land is not available, the 
State Government will provide/ arrange the land. Cost of 
land will not be admissible under Central share of JJM.
.3 Convergence
There are number of ongoing Central and State funded 
schemes for water conservation, ground water recharge, 
rain water harvesting and greywater management 
aiming to achieve water security. Convergence of JJM 
activities with such ongoing schemes will augment funds 
and enhance water resources in terms of quality, 
quantity and longevity. While convergence activities are 
to be taken up under in-village infrastructure, special 
efforts are to be made in DDP/ DPAP, forested and tribal 
areas, water quality-affected and water-stressed areas, 
etc. for achieving water security. In addition to water 
conservation activities taken up through convergence, 
the mission will also converge with other Central and 
State government programmes aimed at skill 
development, training, capacity building and awareness 
generation among communities.
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY)
M/o Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare
Watershed related works
Implementation
Components that can be 
converged
Name of the Scheme
Central/ State Government 
Department
MGNREGS
Watershed Development 
Component (WDC) of PMKSY
M/o Rural Development
D/o Land Resources
Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of water bodies
D/o Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
All water conservation activities 
under Natural Resource 
Management (NRM) component
Watershed management/ RWH/ 
artificial recharge, creation/ 
augmentation of water bodies, etc.
Restoration of larger water bodies 
Swachh Bharat Mission - 
Grameen (SBM-G)
Department of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation, M/o Jal Shakti
Greywater management  
soak pits (individual/ community), 
waste stabilization ponds, etc.
Suggested names of ongoing Central government schemes that can be converged are:
Components that can be 
converged
Name of the Scheme
Central/ State Government 
Department
want to dedicate the effort to, can be mentioned at a 
prominent place at the site of water work.
Village drinking water security can be enhanced by de-
silting of tanks/ water bodies/ lakes identified under 
VAP. This activity can be implemented in a cost 
effective way through convergence and collaboration 
with various stakeholders. The DWSM can explore CSR 
funds for hiring of heavy machinery for de-silting, 
funding of fuel under government programme and 
encourage farmers to take away the silt for use in their 
farmland/ orchards that would increase the 
productivity. Similarly, 'cleaning' of village ponds to be 
taken up to improve the water availability in villages. 
VAP is the basis of implementation at village level and 
all fund towards rural drinking water supply are to be 
spent in accordance with the VAP, thus optimizing 
utilzation of resources and avoiding any duplication. 
JJM will converge and collaborate with multiple 
stakeholders of the water sector to make water 
everyone's business.
Further, the Central and State Finance Commission 
grants can be used for taking up the source 
sustainability and greywater management activities.  
Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) is a time-bound mission-mode 
water conservation campaign in 256 water-stressed 
districts covering 1,592 blocks of the country. The 
Abhiyan converged with other water conservation 
schemes of Central and State governments and carried 
out activities like rain water harvesting/ recharge 
structures, etc. involving communities through 
intensive IEC campaigns. Under JSA, focus may be 
given to achieve drinking water security especially in 
these water starved districts.
Convergence can also be explored beyond Central and 
State government schemes, with Trusts/ Foundations/ 
CSRs/ donors/ community initiatives, etc. who are 
working/ willing to provide support for execution of 
water conservation activities for drinking water security. 
In case of donors who contribute more than 25% of in-
village infrastructure cost, their name or the name they 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY)
M/o Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare
Compensatory Afforestation 
fund Management and 
Planning Authority (CAMPA)
M/o Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal 
Vikas Kendra (PMKVK)
M/o Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship
Samagra Shiksha
M/o Human Resource Development
Aspirational districts 
programme
NITI Aayog
District Mineral 
Development Fund (DMDF)
State
MLALAD
State
Grants under Article 275 (1) 
of the Constitution/ Tribal 
Sub Scheme (TSS)
Ministry of Tribal Affairs and State
National Rural Livelihoods 
Mission/ State Rural 
Livelihoods Mission
M/o Rural Develoment
MPLAD
Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI)
Provision of micro-irrigation for 
various water-intensive crops to 
reduce drawl of water from aquifers
Afforestation, regeneration of forest 
ecosystem, restoration and 
strengthening of springs, watershed 
development, etc.
Skill development, training, etc. for 
human resources required for rural 
water supply schemes
Provision of drinking water 
supply in schools
Water conservation activities 
taken up under discretionary funds 
with District Collector
Water conservation activities 
on large scale
In-village infrastructure
In-village infrastructure
In-village infrastructure
Developing women entrepreneurs 
and SHG led enterprises for water 
supply services
Table 5
al Jeevan Mission (JJM) is a time-bound mission 
J
mode programme and for its successful 
implementation, robust financial planning, timely 
funding, mobilization of adequate resources and 
prudent utilization of funds are pre-requisites. In this 
direction, the SWSM/ DWSM will prepare year-wise 
financial plan by pooling all the available resources for
.1  Costing 
The fund requirement for capital expenditure for JJM 
has been arrived at on the basis of balance households 
to be provided with FHTCs as per 'per household cost' 
for different types of schemes. On the basis of data 
entered by States on IMIS, the balance households to 
be provided with FHTCs were decided. Average 
rural drinking water supply like the Central fund, State 
fund, other programmes, MPLADS, MLALADS, DMDF, 
CSR fund, donations, etc.
Central financial assistance for Jal Jeevan Mission will 
have two sources namely Gross Budgetary Support 
(GBS) and Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR).  The fund 
sharing pattern of the mission will be as under:  
number of persons per household is considered as five. 
This has been done purely to arrive at total outlay for 
the Jal Jeevan Mission and it should not form the basis 
for approval of schemes. The per household average 
cost adopted to arrive at total fund requirement is 
given as under:
Financial Planning and Funding
CHAPTER
Per household 
average cost (in Rs.)
Type of scheme
Retrofitting of ongoing schemes for last mile 
connectivity to provide FHTC 
SVS in blocks having both adequate quantity and 
good quality of groundwater
SVS based on treated groundwater/ in hard rock area
Multi Village Scheme
Mini solar based piped water supply scheme 
in isolated/ tribal hamlets
,500
,000
,000
,000
,00,000
Table 7
The estimated outlay of the mission is Rs 3.60 Lakh 
Crore with Central and State share of Rs. 2.08 Lakh 
Crore and Rs.1.52 Lakh Crore respectively. Accordingly, 
the tentative outlay over the five years is as follows:
Central Share In %
Other States
Union Territories with Legislature
Union Territories without Legislature
State Share In %
-
Table 6
State/ Union Territory
Himalayan and North Eastern States
Year
GoI Share
State Share
Total
-20
-21
-22
-23
-24
Total
,798
,753
,011
,708
,382
,08,652
,202
,247
,989
,292
,618
,51,348
,000
,000
,00,000
,000
,000
,60,000
Table 8
(Amount in Rs. Crore)
A.) Annual allocation under JJM 
(A) = (Gross Budgetary Support) + (Extra 
budgetary Resource)
B.) Earmarking for Department/ National Mission 
level activities = up to 2% of A (which includes 
fund for NCDWSQ)
C.) 
Earmarking for JE-AES = 0.5% of A which is to be 
allocated amongst JE-AES States as per the 
existing criteria in this respect
D.) Earmarking for NE States = 10% of A
E.) 
Earmarking for EAP of RWSSP-LIS = to be allocated 
among the States as per requirement to be 
decided by Steering Committee
F.) 
Allocation for NWQSM as per requirement of 
States decided by Department/ National Mission
G.) Balance amount for non NE states/ UTs = A-
(B+C+D+E+F)
Now, the amount at D.) and G.) is to be allocated 
amongst NE states and non-NE states/ UTs respectively 
as per the following weightage criteria:
% weight
Criteria
Table 9
Up to 5% and up to 2% of such allocated fund to a State/ 
UT will be utilized for support activities and WQM&S 
activities, respectively. Balance will be utilized to 
provide FHTCs to rural households. Funds for SCs and 
STs will be earmarked in the State at least in proportion 
to their population.
The component towards SC and ST indicated in the 
sanction orders to be used by States/ UTs for execution 
of rural water supply schemes to provide FHTCs to rural 
villages/ habitations having majority of SC/ ST 
population in the proportion prescribed.
.2  Allocation/ earmarking of JJM fund at central level
.3  Criteria for allocation of fund 
The criteria and weightage thereof, to be followed for fund allocation under JJM both for budgetary and extra-
budgetary resources will be as under:
States under DDP, DPAP, HADP and special category 
Hill States in terms of rural areas
Rural Population (as per last Census)
Rural SC and ST populaon (
)
as per last Census
Weightage for balance individual household 
connecons to be provided
Populaon (as per IMIS) residing in habitaons aected by 
chemical contaminants including heavy metals 
st
(as on 31  March of preceding nancial year)
Several sub-components/ sub-missions that were part 
of erstwhile NRDWP will also be funded along with 
Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) as per 
following details: 
Centre: State funding pattern
Sub-components/ sub-missions under JJM
S. No.
.
i.) Coverage i.e., infrastructure for Har Ghar Jal  
(in terms of FHTCs provided to rural households)
ii.) Support Activities
iii.) WQM&S
 100:0 for UTs without legislature
 90:10 for NE & Himalayan States & UTs with 
legislature 
 50:50 for other States
  
:0 for UTs without legislature
  
:10 for NE & Himalayan States & UTs with 
legislature 
 60:40 for other States
.
World Bank Assisted Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project  Low Income States (RWSSP-
LIS) in four States namely Assam, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh
 50% external assistance routed through JJM
 33% from coverage component released 
under JJM (erstwhile NRDWP share)
 16%* State contribution
  
% community contribution
*16% averaged out figure considering all four States. 
.
NWQSM in Arsenic and Fluoride affected 
habitations
  
:10 for NE & Himalayan States  
 50:50 for other States
Table 10
Up to 2% of Annual Allocation will be set aside for the 
following activities at the Department/ National 
Mission level:
i.) 
administrative and capital expenditure related to 
NCDWSQ; and 
ii.) 
for Department/ National Mission activities like 
PMU, professional services, third party 
functionality assessment, IEC & capacity building, 
M&E, R&D, action research, HRD, computerizing 
& MIS, centre of excellence, workshops, 
seminars, conferences, exhibitions, etc.
.5  Financial planning
Every State has to prepare a five year State Action Plan 
wherein annual target of FHTCs and corresponding 
financial requirements will be projected. All Schemes 
sanctioned under JJM shall be implemented without 
cost and time overrun. In case of any cost escalation 
beyond the approved cost, it will have to be borne by 
the concerned State and UTs with legislature and no 
additional expenditure out of Central share will be 
permitted. 
.5.1  For on-going NRDWP schemes
i.) 
All schemes under erstwhile NRDWP which were 
scheduled to be completed on or before 31 
March, 2019 and/ or during the year 2019-20 as 
per original approval, should be completed and 
the targeted FHTC to every rural household be 
provided by 31 March, 2020. No extension of 
time or cost escalation will be allowed for these 
schemes. However, for retrofitting, to provide 
FHTCs, additional fund from JJM can be utilized. 
Expenditure towards any such scheme that could 
not be completed within the given time frame will 
be borne out of State fund and no additional 
expenditure beyond Central Share is permitted;
ii.) 
All schemes sanctioned under erstwhile NRDWP 
where the stipulated completion date is after 31 
.4  Fund sharing pattern  for components of erstwhile NRDWP subsumed under JJM
.
JE-AES affected high priority districts (60 
districts)
  
:10 for Assam
 50:50 for other States
Financial Planning and Funding
March, 2020, are to be completed within the 
originally approved time schedule and as per 
approved cost by providing FHTC to every rural 
household. No extension of time or cost 
escalation will be allowed. However, for 
retrofitting to provide FHTCs, additional fund 
from JJM can be utilized. Expenditure towards 
completion of any such scheme that could not be 
completed in the approved time frame will be 
borne out of State fund and no additional 
expenditure beyond Central share is permitted to 
be incurred after the approved time limit. 
.5.2  For new Schemes under JJM
While planning new schemes under JJM, following 
timeline for completion of schemes may be adopted: 
i.) 
maximum time allowed for completion of SVS 
and MVS is 18 and 36 months, respectively;
ii.) 
for schemes requiring up to 3 years to complete, 
contract must be awarded for implementation 
before March, 2021. No contract for such a 
scheme will be awarded after March, 2021. In a 
very special case, where such scheme is 
necessary, matter will be referred with detailed 
justification to DDWS/ Mission for its 
consideration/ approval;
iii.) for schemes requiring up to 2 years to complete, 
contract must be awarded for implementation 
before March, 2022. No contract for such a 
scheme will be awarded after March, 2022 In any 
special case, matter will be referred to DDWS/ 
Mission with justification;
iv.) no new scheme is allowed to substitute failure of 
an existing scheme, i.e. scheme that has stopped 
functioning before reaching its full design period. 
As an exception, if a State submits a proposal for 
replacement with justified reasons for discarding 
existing scheme, the same will be referred to 
DDWS / Mission. 
.5.3  Annual Action Plan (AAP)
Every year, States/ UTs will prepare an Annual Action 
Plan (AAP) in the month of February, in consonance 
with State Action Plan (SAP) and submit the same 
online in the formats developed by the Department/ 
National Mission. It will be firmed up based on 
consultation between the Department/ National 
Mission and State. AAP will inter alia, include
i.) 
number of FHTCs to be provided quarter-wise 
during the next financial year;
ii.) 
prioritizing number of FHTCs to be provided 
through retrofitting for last-mile connectivity, WQ 
affected areas, desert and drought-prone areas, 
JE-AES districts and SAGY villages;
iii.) annual fund requirement;
iv.) month-wise expenditure plan and FHTCs to be 
provided to achieve annual target;
v.) 
sources of fund apart from Central share;
vi.) support activities plan;
vii.) WQM&S plan.
After consultations with the States in the month of 
March/ April, the release of fund to States shall begin 
from month of April as per the details mentioned at 
para 7.8 of the guidelines. In addition to the new 
schemes under JJM, the States may also include 
ongoing/ completed erstwhile NRDWP schemes, 
completed State schemes for which work order has 
 
been issued after 1April, 2019 by retrofitting to make 
them JJM compliant and thereby ensure a holistic AAP. 
In case of ongoing schemes taken up under State 
sector/ non-NRDWP scheme or some other source, 
FHTC is also to be covered from the same programme. 
Supplementation is to be avoided in such schemes 
from JJM fund.
.6  Rewarding performance
JJM being time-bound country-wide programme, 
additional fund will be made available to better 
performing States/ UTs to incentivize their good 
performance out of the fund unclaimed by other 
States/ UTs at the fag end of the financial year, in 
proportion to their annual allocation. The deciding 
parameters for assessing performance of States/ UTs 
will be issued by Department/ National Mission.
For availing this fund, it is important that States/ UTs 
plan to complete the programme by providing extra 
fund for the mission from its own budgetary resources/ 
State Extra Budgetary Resources/ external assistance, 
etc. so that additional fund provided by the Central 
Government is utilized in the same financial year. The 
additional fund will be distributed out of GBS or EBR or 
both as the case may be, among performing States/ 
UTs, based on the criteria of allocation as per para 7.3, 
which is to be used only to meet coverage of FHTCs. 
.7  Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR)
While approving the Jal Jeevan Mission, the 
Government also approved accessing extra budgetary 
resources. Every year, on the basis of fund 
requirement, Ministry of Finance would enable 
Department/ National Mission to access extra 
budgetary resources. These additional resources 
would also be allocated to the States/ UTs along with 
the regular budget in the beginning of every financial 
year as per the allocation criteria as mentioned in para 
.2. Department/ National Mission will review 
utilization of fund under GBS and assess the 
requirement of EBR periodically. Accordingly, demand 
will be raised for EBR as and when required.
.8  Procedure for allocation and release of 
fund
With the approval of Union Minister, Jal Shakti, State/ 
UT wise allocation of fund both GBS and EBR will be 
made as per approved criteria at the beginning of every 
financial year. Annual allocation will be released in two 
equal installments and each installment to be released 
in two tranches. Concurrence of Integrated Finance 
Division of DDWS will be obtained for release of 
installments as a whole for all eligible States/ UTs and 
thereafter Department will release the fund in 
tranches after assessing the utilization of fund by the 
States/ UTs. Thus, releases are planned in consonance 
with 'Just In Time' principle of Ministry of Finance so as 
to avoid any undue parking of fund.
.8.1  Release of funds by Department/ National 
Mission to the States
The installments will be released to the States/ UTs 
based on the utilization of fund as reflected in PFMS 
platform/ IMIS. The funds will be available for following 
sub-components/ sub-missions under JJM:
a.) 
Coverage 
b.) 
JE-AES 
c.) 
RWSSP-LIS
d.) 
NWQSM
For RWSSP-LIS, JE-AES  and NWQSM sub-components, 
allocation and release procedure stipulated in the 
respective existing guidelines will be followed. The 
detail of procedure for release of fund of these 
components is at Annex-XIII. For coverage sub-
component, the following release procedure will be 
applicable for release of 1 and 2 installment: 
st
.8.1.1   Release of 1  installment
I.)  To States/ UTs that have drawn the 2 installment 
during the previous financial year
st
The amount towards the 1  installment will be 50% of 
the total allocation admissible to a State in the financial 
st
year and the fund release towards 1  installment will be 
the balance amount after subsuming excess OB beyond 
% of the previous year, at the time of release. The 
st
release of 1  installment will be phased and made in 
two tranches. The releases will be made automatically 
based on its utilization as shown in PFMS portal/ IMIS. 
Approval of competent authority and concurrence of 
st
IFD for release of entire 1  installment will be obtained.
st
st
tranche will be equal to 50% of the 1  installment 
after subsuming excess OB and it will be released in the 
nd
st
month of April. The release of 2  tranche of the 1  
installment will depend on its utilization as shown in 
PFMS portal/ IMIS. As soon as the progress of utilization 
st
of available fund, i.e. opening balance of the FY and 1  
st
tranche of the 1  installment released, crosses 80%, the 
second tranche of first installment will be released 
automatically by the Department/ National Mission 
(i.e. release without any proposal and reference to IFD).
st
However, balance of 1  installment, i.e. fund subsumed 
st
st
while releasing part of 1  tranche of 1  installment on 
account of excess OB, will be released as and when States 
furnish the UC showing expenditure of at least 60% of 
available fund of central and state share. The release of 
nd
st
tranche of 1  installment will be made automatically 
based on 80% utilization of available fund (OB + fund 
st
st
release under complete 1  tranche of 1  installment).
The UC furnished by States/ UTs at any point of time 
should be countersigned by Principal Secretary or 
Secretary or equivalent officer of the States/ UTs.
ii.) To States/ UTs that have NOT drawn the 2 
installment during the previous financial year 
Fund will be released only after getting the formal proposal 
from the State/ UTs along with requisite documents 
including UC, ASA, etc. (check list at Annex-II & Annex-III.) 
While releasing this part of the fund, the excess 
amount over and above the prescribed limit of OB (10% 
of the previous year release) will be subsumed. 
st
However, balance of 1  installment i.e.  fund subsumed 
while releasing part of first installment on account of 
excess OB, will be released as and when States furnish 
the UC showing expenditure of at least 60% of available 
fund of Central and State share. 
Financial Planning and Funding
st
The release of 1  installment will be phased and made 
in two tranches. The releases will be made based on its 
utilization as shown in PFMS portal/ IMIS. 
st
st
tranche will be equal to 50% of the 1  installment 
after subsuming excess OB. It will be released as and 
when the complete formal proposal seeking release of 
st
installment will be submitted by the State. As soon as 
the progress of utilization of available fund i.e., opening 
st
balance of the FY and the fund released in 1  tranche of 
st
the 1  installment, crosses 80%, the second tranche of 
first installment will be released automatically by the 
Department/ National Mission (i.e. release without any 
proposal and reference to IFD). 
nd
.8.1.2   Release of 2  Installment
The amount towards the 2nd installment will be 50% of 
the total allocation admissible to a State in the financial 
year and the release of fund towards 2nd installment 
will also be phased in two tranches in line with the 
procedure followed for the 1st installment.  
nd
For the release of 2  installment, the financial progress 
shall be assessed based on the following documents to 
be submitted by the State: 
i.) 
provisional UC for the current year for the 
amount equivalent to 60% of available balance 
(Central fund) and State matching share;
ii.) 
report of the AG for the year preceding the 
previous year/ ASA from CAG empanelled CA of 
previous year and
iii.) final Central and State UC for the previous year. 
st
nd
Tranche will be equal to 50% of the 2  installment 
and it will be released as and when the State/ UT 
submits aforementioned documents related to 
financial progress. As soon as the progress of utilization 
of available fund (Central and State share) crosses 80%, 
nd
nd
the 2  tranche of the 2  installment will be released 
automatically by the Department/ National Mission 
(i.e. release without any proposal and reference to IFD).
The last date for receiving any release proposal 
nd
including that of 2  installment by the States/ UTs 
which is complete in all respects as per the checklist at 
Annex-II and Annex-III is 15 February of every financial 
year. Opening balance in the next financial year will be 
allowed to the extent of 10% of the total amount 
released. The amount for which sanction order issued 
in the month of March will not be taken into 
consideration while subsuming in the excess OB. 
.8.1.3  Release of Additional fund to the 
performing States/ UTs
i.) 
the availability of additional fund will be firmed up 
at the fag end of every financial year;
ii.) 
the eligibility of States will be decided by 
Department/ National Mission;
iii.) the additional fund will be released as reward for 
performing States/ UTs as per allocation criteria;
iv.) the additional fund will be brought into two sets 
of common pool, i.e. one for NE States and other 
for non-NE States/ UTs and will be released to the 
performing States/ UTs of respective sets of NE/ 
non- NE States in proportion to their annual 
allocation.
.9  Fund flow 
SWSM will open a single nodal account in any 
scheduled commercial bank. SWSM will obtain details 
from these banks operational in State headquarters on 
services like PFMS compliance necessary for JJM 
implementation. The releases by the Government of 
India to the State Government will be made to their 
State treasuries from where States will be transferring 
the fund to the single nodal account of SWSM within 15 
days along with the corresponding matching State 
share. The SWSM can use the existing single nodal 
account of erstwhile NRDWP or may open a new 
account in any scheduled commercial bank at the State 
Headquarters for maintaining the nodal account under 
JJM, in case there is no single nodal account. 
Any change in the nodal account will be allowed only 
with the concurrence of Department/ National Mission. 
A written undertaking from the Bank needs to be made 
available to the effect that the bank will follow the 
Guidelines of Government of India for making payments 
from Department/ National Mission Fund. The SWSM 
will communicate the details of the Bank branch, IFSC 
code and the account number to Department/ National 
Mission. Bank will allow transaction in nodal account 
only when the request for making the transaction is 
received through PFMS mode and if done through 
treasury, same will be captured/ reflected in PFMS 
system by making suitable interface between concerned 
State treasury and PFMS systems and then only 
transaction be allowed. Bank will agree to abide by the 
instructions issued from time to time by Department/ 
Mission regarding operation of the Account. 
The Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) 
software would support Accounting System and would 
be enabled to allow rural water supply department/ 
SWSM and Bank branch concerned to make data entry 
online for the transactions to be made by them. 
Money accruing as interest will be credited to the same 
account and reflected in the Utilization Certificate (UC) 
of the relevant year. The expenditure out of the 
interest amount will be made on items of work as 
permitted in the guidelines. Any deviation of 
expenditure will be guided by the instructions/ 
guidelines to be issued by Department/ National 
Mission from time to time. The Bank will intimate to 
the SWSM the interest amount credited by it to the 
account on quarterly basis.
The State Government/ SWSM will decide about the 
matching fund as per the prescribed funding pattern. 
On receipt of the Central and State share of JJM by the 
SWSM in the single nodal account, its allocation among 
the Districts, based on the annual district action plans 
(DAP) finalized by the respective SWSM shall be made 
within two weeks. Based on the allocation, a drawl 
limit will be set for every district by the SWSM and it 
will authorize districts to raise payment advice and 
payment will be made from Single Nodal Account. 
DWSM will get the work implemented as per the DAP 
and fund available at the district level, through Gram 
Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group or PHED/ RWS Department as the 
case may be. 
After execution of the work, PHED/ RWS Department 
will raise the bill to DWSM/ SWSM as the case may be, 
who in turn will get the work inspected by an 
empanelled third-party agency. Thereafter, subject to 
due satisfaction of quality and quantity of work 
performed, the DWSM/ SWSM, as the case may be, will 
arrange to make the payments to the agency. The 
payments advice in PFMS mode will be raised by the 
DWSM/ SWSM to make payment to the agency for the 
executed works subject to fund allocation/ drawl limit 
set for the district by SWSM for that particular year. 
Payment advice generated through treasury mode will 
only be allowed only if the same is captured in PFMS 
system, by making suitable interface between 
concerned State treasury and PFMS. The payment 
advice will be sent by DWSM/ SWSM in PFMS mode to 
make the payments from Single nodal account to the 
account of concerned agency as authorized. No 
advance to any other account be made except to that 
of executing agency towards mobilization advance as 
per contract.
.10  Inadmissible expenses
State Government/ SWSM will decide about the 
expenses which are not eligible to be funded under the 
Central share of JJM, such as cost escalation, tender 
premium and other programme expenses which are 
inadmissible under central share. Further, no centage 
will be charged from grant-in-aid to be provided by the 
Government of India. In case, such necessity arises, the 
same will be the responsibility of the State Government/ 
UT Administration. From Support activities, no 'salary' to 
regular employees will be paid and only remuneration/ 
honorarium to personnel/ professional/ consultant 
hired on contract can be paid. From Government of 
India fund provided under JJM, no expenditure on O&M, 
viz. payment of electricity bills related to water works, 
etc. will be made. Suggestive list of inadmissible 
expenses is at Annex-IV.
.11  Community contribution 
As mentioned in para 6.1.2, community contribution 
can be in the form of cash and/ or kind and/ or labour. 
The contribution made in the form of kind and/ or 
labour will be computed and the cash equivalent of the 
same along with the cash contribution will be entered 
and maintained in a separate register by GP and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. The same may be audited and made available as 
and when required by the concerned authorities as per 
para 7.16 of the guidelines.
The community contribution made in cash towards in-
village infrastructure creation will be deposited in the 
respective Bank account of Gram Panchayat and/ or its 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. that may be opened with any scheduled 
commercial bank. This account will be operated jointly 
by chairperson of Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
and respective Panchayat Secretary. Separate ledgers 
have to be maintained for receiving community 
contribution (towards in-village infrastructure creation), 
incentive received and also for user fee provided by 
households towards meeting O&M requirements. The 
community contribution will be paid to Agency/ vendor 
as decided by DWSM.
.12  Funds from other sources towards in-
village infrastructure creation
Elected representatives (Members of Parliament, 
Members of Legislative Assembly, etc.), various 
Financial Planning and Funding
organizations, institutions under CSR arm, 
philanthropists may also contribute towards setting up a 
rural water supply system under JJM. The contribution 
made by the MP towards setting up of rural water 
supply system are to be treated as central share towards 
capital cost of scheme and accordingly, Central share of 
the scheme may be revised by deducting the 
contribution. Likewise, the contribution made by MLA 
or any elected representative of the State will be treated 
as State share and accordingly, State share of the 
scheme may be revised by deducting the contribution. 
Fund received for drinking water supply schemes from 
other Ministries/ Departments of Government of India 
would invariably have FHTCs as its goal. Government of 
India's share of these schemes, if they are partly 
funded under JJM, would be treated as Central share 
towards capital cost. Any new externally aided project 
proposed by the State having rural water supply 
provision would be supported only if it has provision of 
or leading to FHTCs. In both cases, they would be 
included as part of the Department's IMIS for counting 
the number of FHTCs provided.
The contribution of other organizations, institutions 
under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), 
philanthropists, etc. towards the cost of in-village 
infrastructure will be deducted against the total cost of 
in-village infrastructure of the scheme and mandatory 
community contribution may be revised as a 
proportion of the remaining amount. All such 
contribution will be considered as part of capital 
expenditure of the scheme. The calculation of Centre 
share, State share and community contribution will be 
done after the deduction. Community contribution will 
still be mandatory on the remaining cost of the in-
village component of the scheme. All the contributions 
made will be captured in the IMIS.
DWSM/ SWSM may coordinate, converge and collate all 
such efforts of different agencies towards activities 
envisaged under VAP prepared for water supply. There 
will be no parallel works outside the approved VAP, thus 
optimizing utilization of resources & avoiding duplication.
.13  Incentive fund 
The Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. are eligible to 
receive the incentive when the scheme has been 
successfully managed for a year ensuring that every 
rural household covered under the scheme receives 
water in adequate quantity of prescribed quality on 
regular basis and water tariff for O&M has been 
regularly collected. SWSM may develop tangible and 
transparent criteria for providing this fund which is 
meant to encourage sustainability of water supply 
system and O&M by Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc.
The incentive will be 10% of the in-village 
infrastructure cost distributed in a phased manner 
over a period of five years. The incentive fund will serve 
as a revolving fund for meeting any urgent repair costs 
of in-village infrastructure which might disrupt water 
supply and the same will be replenished by 
community. The incentive fund will be provided out of 
the fund available with the State under JJM (Centre and 
State matching share) in the prevailing funding pattern.
.14  Flexi fund available under JJM
As per Office Memorandum 55(5)/PF-II/2011 dated 
.9.2016, placed at Annex-VII, and subsequent 
modifications issued by Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure, flexi fund under JJM can 
be used to achieve the following objectives:
i.) 
to undertake mitigation/ restoration activities in 
case of natural calamities, or to satisfy local 
requirements in areas affected by internal 
security disturbances ;
ii.) 
to pilot innovation to improve efficiency;
States/ UTs are advised to set aside 5% of the annual 
allocation under JJM to take care of unforeseen 
challenges/ issues arising out of natural calamities and 
internal disturbances, which may be used by the State 
at the fag end of the financial year, if remain unutilized. 
Further, States/ UTs may also plan innovation under 
JJM as part of AAP. Refer chapter 8 for further details on 
technological interventions.
.15  PFMS
All transactions under JJM are to be made mandatorily 
through PFMS and instructions issued from 
Government of India on PFMS from time-to-time need 
to be followed. Fund utilization by States/ UTs under 
JJM will be monitored through PFMS. Release of funds 
in future will be linked to the fund availability and 
utilization in PFMS and physical and financial progress 
monitored through IMIS.
.16  Audit 
i.) 
In case of a society, the SWSM will ensure that the 
accounts are audited by a Chartered Accountant 
empanelled by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General within six months of the close of the 
financial year. The audit will be supported by a 
statement of reconciliation with the accounts of 
implementing agency and a certificate of the 
Chartered Accountant on its accuracy; 
ii.) 
DWSM to ensure that every account/ ledger being 
maintained by Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. for receiving community contribution, 
incentive money etc. is audited every financial year;
iii.) Concurrent auditing of GPs or it's sub-committee's 
accounts be done regularly with the help of retired 
local audit officials; 
iv.) A format for the Audit Report from States with 
respect to the JJM is at Annex-III. In addition to 
the Audit by the Chartered Accountant, the works 
under this mission would be subject to audit by 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
(C&AG). The Audit by the C&AG may cover 
aspects of quality of the work done, in addition to 
financial audit;
v.) 
In case the report from Accountant General/ CA is 
not received because of any unforeseen reason, 
the release will not be withheld, if State 
Government/ UT Administration is able to provide 
specific reasons for delay and gives undertaking 
for furnishing the same after the receipt of the 
same from the office of the Accountant General/ 
CA. In case, in the report of AG/ CA, some 
discrepancies/ deficiencies are reported, the same 
will be adjusted in subsequent releases/ follow up 
action taken by State;
vi.) Statement from the Bank Authority is required to 
be submitted along with Audit report in respect of 
available balance along with interest accrued with 
the SWSM as on 31 March of the financial year.
.17  Alternative financing options/ models
States may meet additional fund requirement through 
innovative financing mechanisms like Public Private 
Partnership (PPP), Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM), 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF), etc. Further, Government of 
India will facilitate in accessing fund through multilateral 
agencies like World Bank, Asian Development Bank, etc. 
who are willing to support projects in rural water supply. 
Project proposals that may be submitted for external 
funding will need to adhere to the JJM objectives.
.18  Rashtriya Jal Jeevan Kosh (RJJK)
As part of Indian ethos to help in providing drinking 
water; various individuals, corporate/ industrial 
houses, charitable institutions, etc. contribute/ donate 
regularly. Further, as per Companies Act, 2013, every 
company having net worth beyond the prescribed 
thresholds during any financial year shall spend at least 
% of its average net profits towards Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) activities.  In order to facilitate all 
such donations/ contributions, Rashtriya Jal Jeevan 
Kosh is being set up under NJJM which will serve as a 
receptacle for charitable contributions/ donations and 
CSR fund to achieve goals of JJM.
The following activities will be financed from the Kosh:
i.) 
development of drinking water sources (both 
surface and groundwater) & infrastructure for 
providing safe drinking water to rural households 
under JJM;
ii.) 
R&D and innovative projects to provide rural 
drinking water supply especially water quality-
affected areas;
iii.) greywater management in the village;
iv.) 
innovative proposals for demonstration purpose;
v.) 
capacity building of the communities;
vi.) skill development of identified personnel 
involved in the implementation of JJM at various 
levels; and
vii.) providing/ funding human resources at State 
and/ or District level in consonance with JJM 
implementation requirements;
viii.) any specific activity requested by the donor 
which is in consonance with the goal of JJM.
Financial Planning and Funding
CHAPTER
Technological Interventions 
and Innovations
ural Water Supply sector faces a number of 
R
challenges in terms of terrain, availability of 
quantity and quality water (both ground and 
surface) due to natural and other causes (pollution), 
bringing water from long distance, meeting power 
requirement for pumping, sustenance of technological 
interventions already made (their regular maintenance 
and proper disposal of sludge/ waste generated, etc.), 
difficulty in day-to-day monitoring/ management due 
to systems spread far and wide, leaking distribution 
systems, misuse/ overuse of water, etc. Technology 
offers solutions to address most of the challenges. 
However, in some cases, due to complex nature of 
challenges, the available technology is unable to 
provide a comprehensive solution and hence 
innovative solutions are required.
In areas having harsh climatic conditions as in high 
altitude cold deserts and in areas facing extreme 
terrain challenges or sparsely populated hot deserts, it 
might not be feasible to provide household tap 
connection to every household. In such areas, local 
innovations/ technological solutions will be explored. 
Innovations in drinking water sector will enable 
communities to optimize the existing infrastructure, 
capital investments, operating costs, and thereby 
provide safe drinking water at an affordable cost. 
Emerging technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
Data Analytics, block-chain technology, machine 
learning, nano-technology, etc. can ensure safe water 
availability and functionality of water supply system 
and tap connections. Suggestive technological 
solutions to address challenges in the supply of 
drinking water are as under: 
.1  Solar Energy based stand-alone water 
supply systems for scattered/ isolated/ 
tribal/ hilly villages
A standalone water supply system powered by solar 
energy with minimal O&M costs is to be explored in 
scattered/ isolated/ tribal/ hilly villages. A dedicated 
mini water supply system with solar panels and battery 
back-up, storage tanks of adequate capacity with 
sensors like motor on-off sensors, dry-run sensor and 
water level sensor, steel stages can be set up. Such 
systems are reported to be operational in parts of 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand.
.2  Community Water Purification Plant 
(CWPP) in Groundwater Contaminated Areas
The CGWB report details about the prevalence of six 
parameters in groundwater namely Arsenic, Chloride, 
Fluoride, Iron, Nitrate and Salinity. Out of 6,834 blocks/ 
firkas/ mandals/ taluks in the country, there are 3,559 
affected ones with any of the six parameters. In order 
to provide immediate relief in Arsenic, Fluoride, Iron 
and other heavy metal affected habitations, CWPP can 
be installed to provide 8-10 lpcd as short term measure 
for drinking & cooking purpose. However, as a 
permanent measure, safe groundwater (from nearby 
village) or surface water supply based systems will have 
to be installed to provide FHTC with service level of 55 
lpcd. This is to be accorded priority and all out efforts to 
be made to provide potable water in these quality-
affected habitations, especially with contaminants like 
Arsenic, Fluoride, Uranium, etc.
The choice of technology is left to States to ensure that 
such CWPP systems have robust post installation O&M 
systems and safe disposal of residue so that they 
continue to function as per prescribed standards. 
While there are a number of water treatment solutions 
available for different contaminants such as Nano 
technology based, Reverse Osmosis, Capacitive De-
ionization, Adsorption, Electrolytic De-fluoridation, 
etc., the major considerations while selecting a 
particular technology are i.) availability of filter media, 
ii.) reject management, and iii.) cost effectiveness of 
the solution, etc.
.2.1  Reject management
A RO based treatment plant installed in a village 
produces reject water that is currently disposed off 
either in open drains or discarded nearby creating a 
pool. The quantum of water rejected is usually in large 
quantity based on the recovery ratio of the plant and is 
estimated to be around 60% of the feed water. In order 
to properly manage the reject water, it is suggested to 
store it separately in structures specifically constructed 
for this purpose and use it for non-potable non-
agricultural uses, i.e. washing of vehicles, agricultural 
equipments, house-washing, vessels, flushing/ 
cleaning of nearby community toilets, etc. Signage/ 
warning against the use of the reject water for potable 
Arcial intelligence can be used for ascertaining the data uploading, detecng mechanical failures, opmizing water usage, etc.
Groundwater quality in shallow aquifers in India 2018
RO technology should be adopted only aer due diligence regarding recovery rao, reject water management and NGT's order in this regard
and agricultural uses should be painted/ put up on and 
around the stored RO reject water structures.
.3  Cold deserts/ hard rock/ hilly/ coastal 
areas
.3.1  Cold deserts
Cold deserts are primarily located in high altitudes in 
Himalayan region of Arunachal Pradesh, Ladakh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, etc. The primary 
source of water in these areas is Glacial melt, which is 
being impacted because of climate change. Further, 
the water gets frozen in the pipelines during winters 
disrupting the water supply. Solutions may be explored 
to enhance and store run-off water in small tanks - 
traditional water harvesting structure, i.e. zing. 
Further, artificial glacial reservoirs may be created by 
diverting the run-off to freeze & store as glacier. During 
early spring, it will serve as both drinking water and 
irrigation source. Promoting use of micro-irrigation can 
reduce the irrigation requirement and increase the 
drinking water security. 
.3.2  Hard rock areas
In hard rock areas, Bore-blast technique, fracture seal 
cementation, stream blasting, etc. may be explored 
under skilled supervision for accessing groundwater.
.3.3  Hilly areas
In hilly areas, especially at higher altitudes, it is 
uneconomical to pump water from the valley for a very 
small number of houses. In these places, adopting 
spring-based sources, rain water harvesting and stand-
alone bore-well systems (if feasible) will be 
economical. Spring based systems would require 
careful identification and delineation of spring-sheds, 
locating the aquifers contributing water to springs and 
injection recharging them for sustaining them.
Communities may be encouraged to adopt the 
traditional wisdom of rain water harvesting (like 
bamboo based ones in NE States) for water security. In 
such areas, there is a need to focus on WQM&S.   
.3.4  Coastal areas 
In coastal areas, augmentation of services can be done 
with energy efficient small desalination plants with 
high recovery ratio. Further, in order to avoid the 
ingress of sea water, sub-surface dykes can be 
constructed in rivers that can also improve the 
groundwater based drinking water sources in the 
adjoining areas. Funds under MGNREGS, State 
schemes can be utilized for this purpose.
.4  Use of technology in planning and 
monitoring
With advent of smart technologies, it is possible to have 
centralized and continuous monitoring in real-time. 
Use of Internet of Things (IoT), Geographic 
Information System (GIS) software, etc. will be required 
to achieve this. Use of data analytics will enable 
analyzing data collected from rural areas to be used for 
various purposes by the utilities for smart management 
and better services. It could be helpful for policy level 
interventions required for welfare measures.
The following uses are to be employed:
Planning
i.) 
use of HGM Maps for location of groundwater 
sources. GIS technology will help in finding the 
locations of existing water source;
ii.) 
use of available village digital 3D contour maps 
prepared by MeITY for location of drinking water 
infrastructure and identifying gaps in the in-
village water supply infrastructure;
iii.) digital inventory of existing assets and overlaying 
them on GIS map (hand pumps, infrastructure, 
etc.) for planning of additional infrastructure 
required.;
iv.) 
use of project management software for 
monitoring of implementation;
v.) 
prioritization of village for taking up schemes;
vi.) Decision support systems to support 
implementation across asset types.
Monitoring
i.) 
use of sensors for monitoring water level, 
discharge, water quality, automatic motor 
operation, data logger for capturing the data, etc.;
ii.) 
use of Supervisory Control and Data Access 
(SCADA) system in MVS for monitoring treatment 
plants (parameters like pressure, water quality, 
flow rate, etc.) and distribution system;
iii.) use of IoT for capturing and transmitting the 
above data using mobile networks for analysis 
and use as decision tools;
Sensor based monitoring system will ascertain the supply of water in villages/ habitaons with respect to periodicity, quanty and quality.
Technological Interventions and Innovations
iv.) 
Department/ National Mission will maintain IMIS 
of JJM to capture real-time physical and financial 
progress. This would be available in public 
domain for social monitoring;
v.) 
real time dashboard to constantly monitor the 
functionality of household tap connections;
vi.) use of GIS technology and IoT based sensors to 
monitor the status of functionality of assets 
created under JJM;
vii.) use of AI technologies/ machine learning to 
assess water supply infrastructure in all types of 
schemes (pipes, valves, pumps, motors, etc.) to 
plan and carry out preventive O&M;
viii.) use of suitable block chain technology for 
credible physical and financial data;
ix.) monitoring tools to be used by PHED/ RWS 
Department, etc.
States have to plan use of technology/ innovation and 
integrate it with preparation of DPR. 
.4.1  Use of HGM maps
With the support from DDWS, National Remote 
Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad, has prepared 
Hydro-Geo-Morphological (HGM) Maps (4,898 Nos) in 
:50,000 scale for the country which can be used to 
determine the probable location of ground water 
availability and also the locations for recharge of the 
aquifers. The HGM maps are based on the Survey of 
India topo-sheets in which the local features are also 
available and some States have successfully taken up 
them to determine the location of borewells. Since the 
States have expressed the need to have maps on 
:10,000 scale, they must prioritize to get such maps of 
villages/ habitations prepared based on demand and 
actual needs.
Ground Water prospect maps have been handed over 
to States and are available in the website of 
Department/ National Mission in PDF format. HGM 
maps help in identifying correct sites for production 
wells and sustainability structures for artificial 
groundwater recharge. Use of these maps along with 
geo-physical studies help to cut down the failure of 
bore wells/ tube wells and also help in in-situ dilution 
of certain chemical contaminants. 
.4.2  Use of space technology
Space technology provides real time spatial and 
temporal data. Space based images provide 
information on water resources availability and quality 
using direct and indirect approaches respectively. 
Using remote sensing satellites, it is possible to have 
forecast on water availability, predict the water quality 
of surface waters serving as drinking water sources, 
narrow down the potential areas for groundwater 
availability for field investigations and help to identify 
alternate water sources in cases of drought. The 
Mission is to assist States/ UTs in using space 
technology to achieve drinking water security.  
.5  Technical Committee
In 2014, the then Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation constituted a Standing Committee for 
Examination of best Technologies concerning Water 
and Sanitation. The committee was chaired by Dr. 
Mashelkar, former Director General, Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research. Many technologies 
on water and sanitation were considered by the 
Committee and approved for use in the sectors.
To achieve the goal of universal coverage by FHTC to 
every rural household by 2024, on this scale and with 
speed, there are huge challenges for which innovative 
solutions with the use of new technologies would be 
required.  Keeping this in view, a Technical Committee 
under the chairmanship of Principal Scientific Advisor to 
Government of India has been constituted. The Terms 
of Reference (ToR) of the new Committee are as follows:
i.) 
invite innovative technologies in drinking water, 
sanitation, greywater management and solid 
waste management sectors through Department/ 
National Mission portal;
ii.) 
shortlist technologies for techno-economic 
appraisal;
iii.) facilitate techno-economic appraisal of 
technologies as per the ASSURED matrix 
framework;
iv.) consider appraised technologies for acceptance;
v.) 
recommend any non-technological interventions 
needed to achieve scaling up the use of such 
technologies;
vi.) any other aspect/ activities required to be 
undertaken in respect of appraisal of the 
technologies.
The Committee would identify specific challenges 
faced in the provision of water supply with assistance 
of States, invite online proposals for solving them, 
decide and recommend further action including 
demonstration projects to address the challenges and 
develop performance and technology standards.
.6  Innovation and R&D   
Based on the data available with Department/ National 
Mission NIC, ISRO and States, a digital data platform 
would be created for planning, implementation and 
monitoring of Jal Jeevan Mission in States/ UTs. The 
platform will have multiple GIS and remote sensing 
based layers detailing the drainages, watershed, 
existing pipeline network, geo-genic contaminants etc. 
This would help States to prioritize the areas as well as 
to identify the type of intervention to be adopted in 
different areas within the State.
Further, high-end proposals related to water and 
sanitation received from R&D institutions and 
innovators will be taken up for demonstration purpose 
on pilot basis. After approval of the proposals by 
Technical Committee, Department/ National Mission 
will decide the place of demonstration, in consultation 
with States. This will be a boost for young 
entrepreneurs/ start-ups working in the field of water 
to provide cost effective solutions. Further, action 
research and concurrent evaluation studies will be 
taken up every year by Department/ National Mission, 
SWSM for adopting evidence based policy 
interventions to manage rural water supply effectively.
.7  Water audit and water security
With water availability becoming scarce due to 
multiple reasons, time has come to enforce audit of 
water supplied regularly to reduce the losses in the 
distribution system. There are two types of losses, real 
and apparent losses. Real loss includes water lost 
through leakages in distribution systems, service 
connections and storage tanks (including overflow). 
Apparent loss includes meter and record inaccuracies 
and unauthorized water uses such as theft and 
unauthorized connections. In order to improve the 
efficiency of the water supply systems, States are to 
regularly take up water audit of identified systems for 
effective improvement.
In order to ensure that the investments made under 
the Jal Jeevan Mission lasts on long-term basis, it is 
important to prepare the water budget of the village by 
assessing the total available water from all sources 
(both ground and surface). Further, water use for 
domestic/ agriculture/ industrial purposes, etc. have to 
be assessed. 
Overdraw of and its inefficient use in agriculture leads 
to depletion of ground/ surface water sources in 
villages, seriously affecting the drinking water security. 
The water budget prepared as part of the VAP is to be 
disseminated among the local community so that they 
can be sensitized to improve the agriculture water-use 
efficiency by adopting micro-irrigation and/ or adopt 
cropping pattern suiting the agro-climatic zone. In 
addition to the above, using funds available under 
various schemes like MGNREGS, State schemes, 
PMKSY, etc., scientific recharge of depleted ground 
water aquifers in the village can be done, thereby 
enhancing ground water levels and ensuring water 
security for drinking during summer months.
Many States have already taken up such conservation 
measures and have improved the groundwater 
availability. The recently concluded Jal Shakti Abhiyan, 
an intensive campaign for conservation of water, has 
generated awareness among the public and farmers on 
water conservation and improved agriculture water 
use efficiency. States can take up such campaigns 
under IEC activities for long-term water security.   
Technological Interventions and Innovations
Support Activities
o achieve the goal of providing FHTC to every 
T
rural household by 2024, along with 
development of water supply infrastructure 
there is a need to spread awareness and sensitize 
communities on judicious use of water, community 
contribution and ownership, build capacities of GP 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ 
User Group etc. to plan, implement, manage, operate 
and maintain in-village infrastructure, focus on setting 
up long-term sustainable institutional mechanisms, 
build skills of various human resources required, viz. 
masons, plumbers, electricians, motor mechanics, 
pump operators, etc. These activities will help in 
developing responsible and responsive leadership 
among communities ensuring long-term sustainability 
of the water supply systems. 
For this purpose, the Mission has made provision of up 
to five per cent of annual allocation to the States as 
support activities fund. All States will develop a 
detailed implementation strategy for taking up support 
activities as a part of AAP.
The support funds would be available for States to 
carry out the following functions:
i.) 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
among local communities;
ii.) 
Human Resource Development (HRD);
iii.) public utility and leadership development;
iv.) 
training and skill development;
v.) 
mobilization of local communities;
vi.) third party inspection;
vii.) change management;
viii.) Key Resource Centres (KRCs);
ix.) knowledge centre;
x.) 
documentation of best practices, success stories, 
publications, etc.;
xi.) conducting conferences, seminars, workshops, 
review meetings, exposure visits on JJM;
xii.) IMIS support and related IT infrastructure.
The support activities will be monitored through the 
JJM portal. No support activities fund will be utilized 
for issuing of advertisement in newspapers/ 
magazines, gifts, hosting avoidable functions for 
publicity, etc.
.1  Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC)
JJM is not just about creating water infrastructure, but 
also aims at building capacities of different 
stakeholders especially local communities, responsible 
and responsive leadership to own, manage, operate 
and maintain in-village water supply systems. 
Therefore, IEC strategies, planning and their effective 
implementation will be the key to success of JJM. 
Mission will undertake IEC activities such as PRA 
activities, Inter Personal Communication (IPC), 
Behavioural Change Communication (BCC) and all 
other related communication activities. SWSM will 
lead IEC/ Behavioral Change Communication (BCC) 
plans and will be responsible for embedding of such 
interventions across the State.  
Presently, WSSO is carrying out this work in some 
States/ UTs. Once WSSO is subsumed in the SWSM, an 
Annual plan/ calendar of activities for IEC, HRD, training, 
capacity building will be prepared by the SWSM and will 
be part of AAP. These activities will be part of key 
activities under JJM and is to be given primacy.
The objectives of the IEC activities are to:
i.) 
drive positive behavioral changes among 
stakeholders with respect to judicious use of 
water, safe handling and storage, ownership of 
water supply system, etc.;
ii.) 
create awareness and motivate people to take up 
affirmative action for protection of drinking 
water sources and against misuse of water;
iii.) create awareness and motivate people to 
conserve water resources;
iv.) promote behavior change towards health and 
hygiene aspects;
v.) 
have effective communication strategy involving 
all stakeholders;
CHAPTER
vi.) inculcate sense of responsibility to manage, 
operate & maintain their water supply systems to 
ensure service delivery;
vii.) encourage community contribution towards 
capital cost to instill 'sense of ownership';
viii.) encourage community to measure water and 
promote water tariff/ user charges;
ix.) recognize performance of various stakeholders.
Department/ National Mission will issue IEC guidelines 
separately outlining IEC/ PRA activities for States and 
Districts. However, SWSM is advised to firm up policy 
on earmarking of support fund for IEC activities and 
ensure its subsequent and effective utilization.
.2  Human Resource Development (HRD) & 
Training
HRD support activity identifies and develops key 
competencies through capacity building of various 
stakeholders such as:
i.) 
Key Resource Centers (KRCs) to take up capacity 
building programmes on cascading approach;
ii.) 
contractual staff engaged under SWSM and 
DWSMs;
iii.) Implementation Support Agencies;
iv.) Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc.;
v.) 
village level skilled human resource such as masons, 
plumbers, electricians, pump operators, etc.
Central and State level Training Institutes, KRCs, which 
are centrally empanelled can be engaged directly by 
States and districts at pre-defined rates, empanelled 
NGOs/ ISAs with experience in capacity building are to 
be engaged for such training. The AAPs will contain 
capacity building action plan for aforementioned 
stakeholders. 
Department/ National Mission is already implementing 
'Sujal aur Swachh Gaon' training programme to build 
capacities of representatives from every Gram 
Panchayat.
.3  Public utility, leadership development 
and change management
A public utility is an undertaking that provides essential 
services. JJM envisages a mindset change in the 
provision of drinking water supply services. The service 
provision should change from 'infrastructure 
development approach' to a 'utility based approach'. 
For this, it is required to re-orient both engineering and 
other human resources. This would be undertaken 
through customized orientation programme, exposure 
visits, etc. It would be duty of such institutions to 
provide water supply to every rural household under 
JJM as per the service standards prescribed for both 
quantity and quality. They would also be responsible 
for collecting water tariff/ user charges as prescribed 
and timely address the public grievances arising out of 
such service provision. The personnel managing the 
water supply services at all levels, i.e. village, GP, 
district and State, need to be provided with customized 
training and leadership programmes so as to enable 
them to discharge their role in managing these utilities. 
Change management is 'a structured approach for 
ensuring that changes are thoroughly and smoothly 
implemented and that the lasting benefits of change 
are achieved'. It is the process of ensuring that an 
organisation institutes and supports behaviours and 
tools that are necessary to achieve short and long-term 
goals more efficiently.
As part of these objectives, customised annual training 
calendar to be framed for engineering and managerial 
cadre of the PHED/ RWS Departments in States. The 
programme should be customized to suit different 
levels covering various technical, managerial and 
leadership aspects. It would compulsorily to have a 
two-week training and exposure visit to countries that 
have excelled in rural water supply provision and the 
Department/ National Mission would identify suitable 
partners/ institutions both within the country and 
abroad. For long-term water security, concerted 
efforts need to be made to bring the mindset change to 
make engineers as Public Health Engineers and Utility/ 
Service managers.  
.4  Skill Development & Entrepreneurship
To achieve the goal of FHTC, to every rural household, 
in every village/ habitation on long-term basis, skilled 
human resource in areas like masonry, plumbing, 
fitting, electricity, etc., will be required. Also, agencies 
executing the schemes will need high quality human 
resources on a very large scale since quantum of work 
will continue to multiply manifold during the project 
period. For continuous O&M, local skilled persons 
would be required to service these requirements.
Support Activities
There is a need to plan for skilled human resource in 
each district and for each village, for which 
convergence with Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas 
Kendra (PMKVK) operational in each district will have 
to be worked out. States have to identify district-wise 
requirement of such skilled human resource and 
training of them will have to be taken up on priority 
through PMKVK. Proper training manual in local 
vernacular language is to be prepared. It is 
recommended that such trained persons should be 
issued certificates and services of such people are 
utilized in the schemes/ work taken up under JJM.
The skilled human resource will be encouraged to 
become rural entrepreneurs and start enterprises in the 
rural water supply sector to meet the emerging demands 
of plumbing, mason, electrician, motor mechanics, etc. 
.5  Mobilization of local communities
Mobilization of communities is required to be 
undertaken on a large scale to make JJM a 'Jan 
Andolan'. More on this will be issued separately as part 
of IEC guidelines.
.6  Third Party Inspection
SWSM will empanel third party verification agencies 
based on the ToR issued by Department/ National 
Mission, to check the quality of work executed by the 
agencies, quality of materials used for construction 
and quality of machinery installed in each of the 
scheme.  
.7  Key Resource Centers (KRCs)
KRC is an institution engaged across more than one 
state in capacity building, reorientation of different 
stakeholders, disseminating knowledge and 
information, documenting best practices, etc. to 
achieve the sectoral goal of rural drinking water supply. 
Objectives of KRC are as follows:
i.) 
organize leadership development programmes 
for District Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners/ 
PHED engineers to cope with the change 
management in context of JJM implementation;
ii.) 
upgrade knowledge, skill and attitude of PRI 
functionaries, master trainers and other 
stakeholders;
iii.) update personnel about latest technologies and 
innovations in the water sector;
iv.) organize exposure visits for key personnel 
involved in planning and execution;
v.) 
enhance knowledge and skills about convergence 
with other similar programmes;
vi.) promote better understanding of professional 
requirements as well as sensitization to social, 
economic, technological and political 
environment for effective implementation; and
vii.) enhance the capacity of communication and 
capacity development unit.
Department/ National Mission will empanel KRCs and 
provide funds to national KRCs on a 100% grant-in-aid 
basis and select them based on the track record, viz. 
national standing, overall experience, previous work in 
rural drinking water sector, etc.
.8  Knowledge Centre
Knowledge centre or Centre of Excellence will be set up 
by Department/ National Mission in reputed Indian 
Universities/ Institutions for conducting continuous 
research, studies, providing inputs for policy making, 
programme development, etc. Universities/ 
Institutions will be selected based on research 
achievements, their experience, potential and other 
contributions in the field of water and sanitation.
.9  Documentation 
States will document the best practices/ success 
stories from districts and villages. Further, 
publications/ newsletters required for mission 
activities in vernacular and other languages will be met 
out of these funds. 
Note: A sanitary inspection is an on-site inspection of a 
water supply facility to identify actual and potential 
sources of microbiological contamination for 
evaluation of the physical structure and operation of 
the system and external environmental factors (such as 
toilet location). The information can be used for 
deciding appropriate remedial action to improve or 
protect the drinking water source and supply system. 
Sanitary inspections will be carried out for all new and 
existing sources of water from time to time. The results 
of the sanitary inspections and remedial actions that 
need to be taken to improve conditions will be 
discussed with the community. In JE-AES and Acute 
Diarrhoeal Diseases affected districts, it is advised to 
undertake sanitary inspection twice in a year.
The decline in water availability and its quality 
associated with rise in population growth, expansion of 
industrial and agricultural activities and climate 
change driven alterations to the hydrological cycle has 
become a global phenomenon. The monitoring and 
surveillance of water quality is now imperative.
It is important to note that, the community accords 
great priority for access to water, but water quality 
issues do not attract similar attention. This is because, 
at grassroots, water quality is usually ascertained only 
by color, odour and taste of the water. The presence of 
most of the chemical contaminants does not exhibit any 
change in terms of color, odour or taste in comparison 
with potable water and the communities continue to 
consume the quality-affected water in ignorance of 
potential threats of consuming such contaminated 
water. Some communities believe that boiling the water 
will secure it from harmful contaminants and continue 
to use quality-affected water for cooking purposes. 
Hence, there is a definite need to generate awareness 
and education on water quality and engage 
communities in water quality surveillance. 
The activities for water quality monitoring and 
surveillance include:
i.) 
awareness and education programmes on water 
quality in Schools, Anganwadi centres, Health 
centres, GPs/  PRIs, etc.;
ii.) 
Awareness generation and capacity building of 
all stakeholders at all levels on various aspects of 
ater testing is important for monitoring the 
W
operation of water supply, verification of 
the safety of drinking water, investigation 
of disease outbreaks, validation process and 
preventive measures. Water quality testing tools need 
to be used for deciding safety of drinking water: at the 
source; within a piped distribution system; or at the 
end of consumer. 
Drinking water quality monitoring and water quality 
surveillance are distinct yet, closely related activities. The 
drinking water quality will be monitored by the PHED/ 
RWS Department, i.e. supplier/ agency responsible/ 
mandate for water quality whereas the surveillance of 
water quality at grass roots will be responsibility of the 
GPs/ rural community.  
Monitoring of water quality involves laboratory and 
field testing of water samples collected from water 
sources and FHTCs. Facility of laboratories for Water 
quality monitoring of rural areas already set up at 
State/ District/ Sub-division/ Block/ level will be used. 
Also, mobile water quality testing laboratories will be 
put into operation to the extent possible.
Every Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. is to identify and 
train five women in every village to undertake 
surveillance activities. Water quality surveillance is 
undertaken with the local community as per the 
specified timelines. The water quality surveillance 
activities include: 
i.) 
use of FTKs at GP level to know the extent of 
contamination and refer the positively tested 
samples to the nearby water quality testing 
laboratory for confirmation; and
ii.) 
sanitary inspection: an investigative activity to 
identify and evaluate factors associated with 
drinking water that may pose a risk to health. The 
inspection takes care of prevention and detection 
of risks  and help in taking timely remedial action 
before public health problems occur. Also, 
identification of the sources of outbreaks of 
water-borne disease get known timely and 
corrective action as may be required get taken 
promptly. 
Water Quality Monitoring 
and Surveillance
CHAPTER
water quality, it's importance, water borne 
diseases, health effects, safe handling, storage, 
etc.;
iii.) engage communities in surveillance activities 
such as mandatory sanitary inspections;
iv.) 
enable communities to undertake presumptive 
testing of water quality using FTKs;
v.) 
share the results of water quality testing within 
community by way of SMS/ post cards to all the 
major stakeholders in community viz. Sarpanch, 
up-Sarpanch, GP members/ VWSC/ Paani samiti 
members, etc. The positive results will be 
uploaded on IMIS and alerts to be sent to officials 
wherever intervention from PHED/ RWS or 
Health Department is required, etc.; 
vi.) Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. 
VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. to identify, 
train and appoint 5 women from local 
community to conduct water quality tests using 
FTKs/ bacteriological vials and report the results;
vii.) strengthening of water quality testing 
laboratories by setting-up/ upgradation of State 
district/ sub-division/ block/ mobile laboratories 
and monitoring by undertaking laboratory 
assessment and improvement plans. The 
laboratory assessment will include HR available 
and their training need analysis, physical 
infrastructure (laboratory environment), 
equipments & instrumentation, annual 
maintenance contract mechanisms, number of 
samples being tested against the target and 
requirement. The improvement plans for each 
laboratory will mention the  process to fill the 
identified gaps;
viii.) setting up a system to procure/ refill FTKs/ 
bacteriological vials and monitoring their 
utilization;
ix.) 
providing guidance and training to personnel at 
different managerial levels in water quality 
testing, monitoring, data interpretation and 
reporting;
x.) 
corrective actions by State PHED/ RWS 
Department in case of major water quality 
contamination, if required, alerting Health 
Department for mitigation and/ or corrective 
actions especially in Arsenic/ Fluoride, Uranium 
contaminants and bacteriological contaminations;
xi.) 
accreditation of drinking water quality testing 
laboratories as per IS/ISO/IEC:17025 at least for 
parameters of basic water quality importance 
and gradually upgrading to other parameters as 
per local conditions;
xii.) cross verification of water quality data and 
integration with other laboratories of State/  
Central government agencies.
PHED/ RWS Departments in the States/ UTs may refer 
to 'Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring 
Protocol'. The Protocol is suggestive in nature and has 
advisory value for guiding and supporting the States/ 
UTs in water quality testing, monitoring and 
surveillance activities effectively. The protocol defines 
the water quality parameters needed to be tested in 
laboratories at different levels and for testing by using 
FTK at GP level. The salient features of the revised 
version of Protocol include; i.) institutional framework 
that can strengthen laboratories, ii.)  roles and 
responsibilities of PHED/ RWS departments and 
laboratories, iii.) monitoring framework for quality, iv.) 
ranking of State and district laboratories, v.) pre-defined 
roster of sources and vi.) third party verification. 
Specific focus has been given to procurement processes 
especially using GeM portal, NABL accreditation, 
incorporating advanced instruments for improving 
standards of water testing and accountability.
The States/ UTs are encouraged to explore Public-Private 
Partnership wherein the PHED/ RWS Department may 
collaborate with NABL/ ISO/ other suitably accredited 
private firms as Support Organization (SO) and utilize 
their strengths following all SoPs as per government 
procedure. Example: Hub and spoke model in healthcare 
sector, West Bengal PHED model in drinking water 
quality testing sector are valuable contributions. 
Additionally, 
 may also be 
Public-Public Partnership
explored wherein the PHED/ RWS Department will 
collaborate with the water quality testing laboratories of 
other similar State/ Central Government agencies. 
Further, States/ UTs may also designate any NABL/ ISO/ 
other suitably accredited
 
 Public or Private water quality
testing laboratories/ firms on turnkey basis following all 
codal formalities prescribed in Government procedures. 
Example: Himachal Pradesh IPH Department Model.
States/ UTs may also encourage & promote rural 
entrepreneurship and enterprises for water quality 
testing at local level. The local enterprises could be 
responsible for a cluster of villages, or block(s) and 
make water quality testing easy to access. 
States/ UTs may explore possibility of engaging 
laboratories established in colleges/ universities/ 
polytechnic institutes for water quality testing on 
nominal payment basis agreed among DWSM and 
concerned institution.
Supply of prescribed quality of water is a crucial factor 
which decides functionality of HTCs. For ensuring this, 
water quality testing laboratories established under 
erstwhile ARWSP, NRDWP and now JJM will also make 
provision for getting water samples collected by 
general public tested at a nominal rate that may be 
fixed by the Department. Wide publicity about this be 
given so that public gets to know about this initiative.
.1  Frequency of testing
The broad guidelines for undertaking testing of 
sources/ samples at different level:-
i.) 
Sub-division/ block laboratory: It is suggested 
that Sub-divisional/ block lab will test 100% water 
sources under its jurisdiction; once for chemical 
parameters and twice for bacteriological 
parameters (pre and post monsoon) in a year, 
covering all sources of a block at least for 13 basic 
water quality parameters. The positively tested 
samples will be referred to the district laboratory 
immediately. The other parameters may be 
tested as per local contamination. In case, block 
level laboratories are not available, services of 
laboratories of  nearby educational institutions 
or universities may be explored and availed.  
ii.) 
District laboratory: It is suggested that district lab 
will test 250 water sources/ samples per month (i.e. 
,000 in a year as per the target of roster available 
on Department/ National Mission IMIS) covering all 
sources randomly spread geographically including 
the positively tested samples referred by the sub-
division/ block laboratory/ mobile laboratory on at 
least for 13 basic water quality parameters. The 
district lab will also refer the positively tested 
samples to the State laboratory immediately. The 
other parameters may be tested as per local 
contamination at district level. 
iii.) State laboratory: The State lab will test at least 5% 
of the total drinking water samples across all 
district level laboratories with random and 
uniform geographical spread including positively 
tested samples referred by district/ sub-division/ 
block/ mobile lab.  If the number of districts in any 
State/ UT is large (>50), then the testing of 
samples/ sources may be restricted to 3% for the 
State lab. Remaining 2% may be integrated with 
other regional/ district laboratories. 
iv.) Testing of water quality using Field Test Kit (FTK) 
at Gram Panchyat level: Gram Panchayat and/ or 
its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. will ensure to test 100% drinking 
water sources including private sources and 
sanitary inspection under its jurisdiction using 
FTK. The test results and sanitary inspection 
report will be submitted to the concerned PHED/ 
RWS Department.
.2  Funding
i.) 
Up to 2% of the allocation to States can be utilized 
for carrying out WQM&S activities;
ii.) 
all the above activities shall have a funding 
pattern of  90:10 for NE and Himalayan States and 
:40 for remaining States. The fund sharing 
pattern for UTs shall be 100:0 between Centre and 
UT Administration in UTs without legislature and 
:10 for UTS with legislature;
iii.) the fund may be utilized for activities like setting 
up of State level laboratory (building cost 
permitted only for State Level Laboratory), new 
district/ sub-divisional laboratories (building cost 
to be borne by the State Government, rental 
charges could be booked under this fund), 
laboratories under PPP mode, upgrading of 
existing water quality testing laboratories which 
inter-alia include procurement of equipments, 
instruments, chemicals/ reagents , glassware, 
consumables, hiring of outsourced human 
resources (regular staff to be paid salaries by the 
State Government/ UT Administration), hiring of 
vehicles for transportation of water samples 
collected from the field to the laboratory and 
expenses incurred for NABL accreditation process 
(consultant fee, audit cost, application fee and 
annual fee);
iv.) 
these funds can also be used for procurement of 
FTKs, refills and bacterial detection kits;
v.) 
salary of regular staff and any services, 
expenditure incurred in excess of the 2% allocation 
will be met from fund of the State Government. 
SWSM may also decide to pay honorarium to a 
dedicated person at GP level for ensuring water 
The 13 basic water quality parameters are placed at Annex-XI
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance
quality tests through FTKs/ bacteriological vials in 
prescribed time and submit data to higher 
authorities.
.3  Water quality monitoring in quality -
affected areas
There may be water sources where the concentration 
of chemical contaminants is found to be at border line, 
i.e a little lower than the permissible limit as prescribed 
in BIS:10500. To ensure that the water supply through 
FHTC is of prescribed quality, villages using such water 
sources necessitate periodic monitoring and may be 
enlisted as 'hot spots'. The list of such 'hot spots' is to 
be shared by PHED/ RWS Department with SWSM, 
DWSM and GP. PHED/ RWS Department is to 
undertake regular monitoring of water quality of such 
water sources and water quality surveillance will be 
done by GP and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. and local community. 
Corrective measures need to be taken wherever and 
whenever required. 
Water quality data of water sources in 'hot spots' will 
specifically be monitored through JJM IMIS. Before 
selecting any such water source for piped water supply 
system, it will be discussed by Gram Panchayat and/ or 
its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. and approved through 
, as 
Gram Sabha
mentioned in Chapter 6.
.4  List of training and IEC activities
i.) 
display of details of nearest water quality testing 
lab in prominent locations in villages/ blocks/ 
districts;
ii.) 
water quality training of departmental 
stakeholders, Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc., ISAs, PRIs, barefoot technicians, etc.;
iii.) awareness generation on water quality issues, 
water-borne diseases and health impacts;
iv.) 
water safety planning;
v.) 
behavioral change communication on- 'strictly 
avoiding water from quality-affected source';
vi.) inter-personal communication (door to door 
contact) on importance of good quality drinking 
water in  nutrition;
vii.) audio-visual publicity on ill effects of consuming 
contaminated water, importance of sanitary 
inspection, process of getting private water 
quality sources tested, etc.;
viii.) wall writings promoting tap water as- 'it is free 
from contamination' and;
ix.) slogans, group meetings, street plays, PRA 
activities, exhibits, etc. on water quality.
.5  Monitoring
Use of latest technology to capture water quality data 
automatically will enhance decision making and 
performance of water supply utilities. PHE will also 
employ water quality sensors and IoT based monitoring 
systems. The current process of monitoring through 
online portal and field visits by SWSM/ PHED/ RWS 
Department will be followed. The States/ UTs will hold 
regular review meetings to monitor the water quality 
status. The data will be made available on public domain. 
The JJM IMIS portal will capture the following:
i.) 
water quality monitoring through laboratory 
tests at all levels as per the frequency;
ii.) 
water quality surveillance undertaken by 
community through FTKs in all villages as per the 
frequency of testing;
iii.) progress of FHTCs provision in water quality-
affected districts and JE-AES districts;
iv.) 
separate reports will be generated to monitor 
villages affected with Arsenic, Fluoride and Iron. 
And, any other as may be decided by 
Department/ National Mission;
v.) 
laboratory assessments and respective 
improvement plans;
vi.) number of State/ District laboratories having 
NABL accreditation and No. of Block/ sub-
divisional laboratories;
vii.) lab ranking;
viii.) use of FTKs/ biological vials by communities as 
per recommended number of tests;
ix.) emerging cases of water quality issues.
CHAPTER
Monitoring and Evaluation
.1  Monitoring
Effective monitoring mechanisms will ensure 
functionality of tap connections, i.e. drinking water 
supply in adequate quantity of prescribed quality on 
regular basis.   
JJM monitoring mechanisms comply with the global 
standards, viz. Global Competitiveness Index (GCI). GCI 
measures national competitiveness defined as 'set of 
institutions, policies and factors that determine the level 
of productivity'. GCI includes following two indicators:
i.) 
exposure to unsafe drinking water: It measures a 
population's exposure to unsafe drinking water, 
taking into account the extent of exposure by risk 
level and the severity of that risk's contribution to 
disease burden;
ii.) 
reliability of water supply: This is based on how 
reliable is the water supply (lack interruptions 
and flow fluctuations).
Measurement of water supplied for 
monitoring
What cannot be measured cannot be managed. In 
order to manage both the in-village infrastructure 
meant for SVS, large scale infrastructure projects for 
MVS and those piped water supply schemes with a 
stand post, it is necessary to have data on water 
supplied every day, the quality of water supplied as well 
as depth of water in bore wells. Further, in case of MVS, 
the water made available to various villages every day is 
also to be measured. Since rural water supply schemes 
are spread far and wide, it is necessary to leverage the 
IT tools like sensors, IoT, customized dashboards, etc. 
for regular capturing and analysis of data for 
management decision making by the management. 
The following are suggested in this regard:
i.) 
in SVS and piped water supply with stand posts, it 
is necessary to have sensors to measure water 
drawn every day from different sources, water 
level in the bore-well in case of groundwater 
based scheme, switching on and off of pumps on 
the basis of overflow sensors in the storage tanks. 
Also, some basic sensors for measuring water 
quality aspects like pH, presence of nitrates, 
salinity, etc. can be explored and installed. This 
data would be captured at regular intervals and 
stored in a data logger for manual retrieval or 
transmitted to cloud server using a SIM;
ii.) 
in case of MVS, a bulk water meter is to be 
installed in every village that receives water in 
their sump. Also, sensors for switching on and off 
of pumps, measuring sump water level are to be 
installed. SCADA systems for large treatment 
plants are mandatory for both operation of the 
plant as well as for monitoring. States can also 
explore and adopt SCADA for distribution systems 
for measuring the pressure, leakage and quality 
aspects of supplied water;
iii.) the MIS should be developed for capturing the 
data collected through sensors and analyzing 
them. It is important to have same data capturing 
formats and protocols across the States for data 
handling consistency. The States can also tweak 
the existing MIS, if they have, to meet the data 
consistency requirements;
iv.) dashboards need to be created to capture the 
following:
a.) Planning
b.) Execution
c.) Operation and Maintenance
d.) Daily water supply details of villages including 
quantity and quality.
It should be ensured that, these aspects should be 
organically integrated from the planning stage itself as 
part of the estimates so that they can be tested and 
commissioned along with the scheme/ project.
Department/ National Mission would create an IMIS 
for capturing financial and physical progress of the 
Mission and the Rural Water Supply/ PHE Department 
would be responsible for entry of data in IMIS. 
.1.1  Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS)
A dedicated JJM IMIS is designed to capture every 
Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC). The JJM 
IMIS will include:
i.) 
provision for uploading VAPs, DAPs, SAPs and 
State-wise AAPs;
ii.) 
monitoring of constitution of Gram Panchayat 
sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc., bank account opening, community 
contribution, etc.; 
iii.) monitoring ISAs performance in allotted villages, 
viz. resource mapping, PRA activities, etc.;
iv.) 
monitoring physical and financial progress of all 
schemes;
v.) 
monitoring of water quality laboratories and 
surveillance by communities using FTKs;
vi.) monitoring of change management activities;
vii.) monitoring of support activities, etc. 
The reports generated would be used for regular 
monitoring through field visits, workshops, video 
conferences, etc. A digital district inventory of drinking 
water assets would be created for better management 
of schemes and monitoring them. Every MVS network 
system will be monitored through SCADA system at 
State level for ensuring its proper functioning.
It would be ensured that the data from States in respect 
to physical progress of various projects, geo-tagging of 
assets, expenditure made on the projects, functionality 
status of projects would be captured on JJM IMIS and 
will be kept in public domain through which there is a 
scope of social audit as well as overseeing by end-users 
and various institutional structures.
Sensor-based water supply measurement for 
periodicity of supply, quality and quantity is to be 
employed. Its integration with control and command 
and IMIS is required to be taken up to monitor 
functionality of water supply system continuously.
.1.2  Real-time dashboard
A real time dashboard would capture all the essential 
monitoring parameters i.e., number of FHTCs provided 
so far, number of FHTCs remaining to be provided 
before 2024, number of functional tap connections 
provided and non-functional ones. This data would be 
available in public domain. 
Funconality assessment is placed at Annex-VI 
Monitoring and Evaluation
Fully-funconal
Parally-funconal
Non-funconal
>= 55 lpcd
Potable
months or 
daily basis
> 40 lpcd
< 55 lpcd
Potable
-12 months
< daily basis
< 40 lpcd
Non potable
< 9 months
< daily basis
Quanty
Quanty
Regularity
Table 11
.1.3  Geo-tagging assets
To bring transparency and for monitoring, States are 
required to geo-tag all the assets of water supply 
schemes. Every infrastructure asset either new or 
otherwise will be geo-tagged including washing and 
bathing places, greywater collection and treatment 
plants, source sustainability structures, etc. 
.1.4  Linking FHTCs with Aadhar
For targeted delivery and monitoring of specific 
outputs, it is proposed that FHTC is to be linked with 
the Aadhar number of the head of the household, 
subject to statutory provisions.
.1.5  Surveillance by community
Community will closely observe the functioning of 
their water supply scheme and will be responsible to 
manage, operate and maintain their in-village water 
supply infrastructure. The community will also 
undertake regular sanitary inspections as detailed in 
chapter 10 and collectively decide on mechanisms to 
prevent misuse of water. The community will be 
empowered to file grievances with respective DWSM/ 
SWSM through a dedicated toll free number, online 
portal, etc. 
 11.2  Evaluation
Functionality assessment
Functionality is defined as having infrastructure, i.e. 
household tap connection providing water in adequate 
quantity (55 lpcd) of prescribed quality (BIS:10500) on 
regular basis (everyday or as decided by GP and/ or its 
sub-committee). It will also include long-term source 
and system sustainability. 
Functionality of tap connections will be categorized 
based on the parameters as shown under in table 11.
Since source sustainability is one of the conditions for 
deciding the functionality of tap connections, the 
functionality assessment criteria will also include 
questions on source sustainability measures carried 
out/ executed for different types of schemes and with 
convergence through MGNREGS, IWMP, etc. (refer 
Para 6.3 for more on Convergence) 
Government of India will carry sample survey to assess 
the functionality of household tap connections. Based 
on the functionality assessment, funds will be released 
to States. The functionality assessment will also 
capture other necessary information to ascertain long-
term sustainability of the system.
Measuring Outputs and Outcomes
al Jeevan Mission's primary output is providing 
J
all rural households with a Functional Household 
Tap Connection (FHTC) by 2024. In parallel, the 
Mission also strives to achieve 4 key measurable 
outcomes such as improved health conditions of 
rural communities; reduction in drudgery faced by 
women and girls and empowerment of women, 
reduced school dropout rates of upper primary level 
girls; and increase in employment opportunities for 
rural communities. Such an approach would ensure 
socio-economic wellbeing of rural households. The 
specific outcomes in the results framework are 
detailed below:
Output-Outcome Frame Work of JJM
Outputs
Indicator(s) 
Means of Verification 
Outcome 1: Reduced waterborne diseases and healthy rural communities.
Outcome Indicator: % Reduction in numbers of Acute Diarrheal Diseases reported compared to all 
episodes reported in last bulletin of National Health Profile 2019.
Functional Household 
Tap Connection 
[FHTC] provided to 
every rural 
household by 2024.
Number of FHTCs provided
IMIS data, Visible FHTCs, functionality 
assessment, social audits
Number of FHTCs delivering water 
in adequate quantity, i.e. 55 lpcd
Flow meters, household meters, 
Functionality assessment
Number of FHTCs delivering 
water of prescribed quality, 
i.e. BIS standards
FTKs/ bacteriological vials distributed, 
samples tested at laboratories, .
functionality assessment, 
community feedback
% reduction in water borne 
disease at households
Health data, Number of hospital visits, 
data with ASHA worker
Outputs
Indicator(s) 
Means of Verification 
Outcome 2: Reduced drudgery of women.
Outcome Indicator: Number of womenfolk who are relieved of drudgery of
carrying water from distant sources.
FHTC in all rural households 
increased productive 
household time of women. 
Increased participation of 
women in GPs and SHGs
Review of GP and SHG minutes 
of the meeting.
Outputs
Indicator(s) 
Means of Verification 
Outcome 3:  Reduced drop out of upper primary school girls 
Outcome Indicator: Upper primary school girl's dropout rates decreased from -% to -% and 
increase in attendance from -% to -%
FHTC in all rural households 
relieved upper primary 
school girls from travelling 
long distances in fetching 
drinking water.
% increase in number of 
upper primary girls going 
to school.
School enrolment and 
attendance register. 
Outputs
Indicator(s) 
Means of Verification 
Outcome 4:  Increased employment opportunities for rural communities.
Outcome Indicator: Wellbeing of the rural households improved with- % increase in the household incomes. 
FHTC in all rural households 
opened opportunities for
employment.
% increase in number of days of 
employment  per year
Local employment/payment register, 
Number of local enterprises set up.
Table 12
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
limate change driven extreme weather events 
C
like droughts and floods are unpredictably 
altering the current and future availability of 
freshwater. The adverse impacts resulting from 
uncertain availability of adequate and quality water, in 
turn affect availability of food, health parameters, 
nutrition and livelihood security. Also, the increasing 
instances of landslides, earthquakes, etc. at times 
damage water supply infrastructure resulting in 
disruption of drinking water supply. This poses a 
challenge for urban/ rural planners working for 
providing safe drinking water to communities and 
hence, JJM will strengthen the efforts of States/ UTs in 
implementing their disaster management plan. 
The key challenges in a disaster situation are: 
I.) 
advance planning and preparedness to mitigate/ 
minimize the impact of disaster;
ii.) 
rapid response at time of disaster; and 
iii.) restoration of the services with a robust and 
resilient supply system post disaster. 
Thus, the plan has to address the above challenges in 
the context of drinking water supply.
Pre-disaster: This is the planning phase. Concrete 
planning and efficient deployment of resources during 
this period reduces losses at time of a disaster. 
Prevention and Mitigation
I.) 
improvement in water storage capacity of 
aquifers is the best long-term strategy. Passive 
recharge of aquifers particularly in forested areas 
is the most effective water conservation method 
for future drinking water security. Forests can 
hold larger volume of water for longer durations 
on the forest floor that acts like a sponge to slowly 
release water into streams; an example of how 
certain ecosystems ensure water availability and 
flood risk reduction. However, this involves long-
term planning and action;
ii.) 
efforts towards increasing availability of quality-
water from shallow and deep aquifers will ensure 
water availability during periods of drought and 
delayed monsoon;
iii.) presence of resilient infrastructure is rewarding 
in crisis situation and it is very effective in 
prevention/ mitigation and for minimizing impact 
of the disaster. While laying pipelines in hilly 
areas, care should be taken to avoid landslide 
prone areas. Also, anchoring of pipes has to be 
done effectively so that they do not get washed 
away by floods/ mud flows. The location of water 
supply infrastructure like treatment plants, 
underground reservoirs, public drinking water 
access points, etc. should be selected carefully so 
as to have protection from floods and cyclone, 
landslides, land slips, impact of earthquake, etc.;
iv.) 
at the time of creation of RWS infrastructure, 
compliance with the standards/ codal provisions/ 
guidelines issued for earthquake/ flood or 
cyclone/ landslide prone areas, by institutions 
like Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)/ Central 
Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organisation (CPHEEO) will ensure creation of 
infrastructure having long life;
v.) 
the SLSSC while sanctioning the schemes should 
verify the vulnerability of proposed water supply 
infrastructure to disasters and should record their 
comments, keeping in view afore-mentioned 
aspects, in the minutes of the meeting;
vi.) while preparing VAP, local communities' 
knowledge and information on these aspects 
should be taken into account while finalizing sites 
and plan. 
Disaster preparedness: This process involves measures 
that enable Governments, communities and individuals 
to respond rapidly to disaster situations and cope with 
them effectively. 
Contingency plans must mention the location of 
sustainable water sources and the design of water-
supply systems. This knowledge is critical in effective 
disaster preparedness and post disaster recovery. 
Hazards to catchments, reservoirs and distribution 
systems also need to be considered in the 
contingency plan.
In disaster prone areas, like coastal areas, flood prone 
tracts, Himalayan States etc. States should plan for 
Disaster Management
stationing permanent mobile water purification plants 
at the nearest possible safe locations and develop an 
inventory of these plants. Similarly, lot of spot sources 
like hand pumps have been created under erstwhile 
NRDWP and various State schemes. In the event of a 
natural disaster like cyclones and floods, the hand 
pumps provide interim solution to provide potable 
water until the water supply through pipelines is re-
established. Thus, there is a need to ensure upkeep of 
these hand pumps by periodic checking of their 
functionality. Raising of platforms of hand pumps will 
prevent mixing of flood water and this activity can be 
done by using funds available with States for disaster 
preparedness or State fund. 
Emergency preparedness for response
Preparedness at all levels, i.e. Departmental (State 
level), district and village level is of utmost importance. 
Key elements of preparedness are:
I.) 
identification and access to trained human 
resources for post disaster damage & needs; 
ii.) 
assessment and planning for providing 
transitional services and; restoration of disaster 
impacted systems. A sound and integrated 
training in related sectoral courses should be 
imparted by the state government; 
iii.) prepositioned emergency water supply kits to 
provide transitional services in camps and other 
mass displacement situations; 
iv.) water quality surveillance with reference to 
disease surveillance as part of concurrent 
monitoring;
v.) 
adapt or design new systems to minimize local 
flooding, sewage overflow routing or storage; 
and 
vi.) build in preventive maintenance to clear drains 
and sewers regularly.
During disaster: During this period, the needs and 
provisions of affected people are met to alleviate and 
minimize suffering. 
Key elements of response to disaster will be:
I.) 
access to trained & skilled human resources for 
providing transitional services;
ii.) 
access to prepositioned emergency water supply 
kits camps and other mass displacement 
situations;
iii.) setting up of mobile water purification plants in 
affected area;
iv.) water quality surveillance with reference to 
disease surveillance using field test kits;
v.) 
supply of adequate purification kits.
Post-disaster: Providing potable drinking water and 
sanitation facilities during and post disaster situations 
like flood, cyclone, earthquake, etc. is one of the biggest 
issues and should be treated as a top priority. After a 
disaster, the key challenge is to achieve rapid and 
durable recovery which does not reproduce the original 
vulnerable conditions. Post disaster reconstruction aim 
is to restore pre-disaster water supply condition. This 
includes activities such as quick and effective 
replacement of damaged water source and water 
supply infrastructure. While doing so, due care needs to 
be taken for long-term development prospects and 
potential disaster proneness and ensure 'build back 
better' the water supply infrastructure. Thus, a 
conscious integration of disaster resilience into the 
material selection as well as construction planning will 
be done for disaster proofing of the water supply 
infrastructure rather than reproducing the same 
conditions as were before.
As per the instructions of Ministry of Finance, 25% of the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme's annual allocation of 
funds to the States can be used as flexi-funds. For 
meeting the immediate requirement of funds for post 
disaster recovery works, flexi-funds available with States 
under JJM can be used. States/ UTs are advised to set 
aside at least 5% of the annual allocation under JJM to 
take care of unforeseen challenges/ issues arising out of 
natural disasters/ calamities and internal disturbances, 
which may be used by the State for coverage at the fag 
end of the financial year, if remain unutilized.
In addition to the above, States are also provided State 
Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) by successive Finance 
Commissions. The same can also be used for post 
disaster recovery works for providing drinking water 
and sanitation. Further, if the disaster demands 
additional funds, on the request of the State/ UT 
Administration, Inter-Ministerial Central Teams are 
constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs/ 
Agriculture as the case may be, and they visit the State 
and make assessment of the disaster and recommend 
funds. Based on this recommendation, funds over and 
above SDRF is made available under National Disaster 
Response fund (NDRF).  
Externally Aided Projects 
CHAPTER
xternally Aided Projects (EAPs) are an 
E
important source of additional funding 
available to the States for filling the funding 
gap that may arise in JJM implementation. States to 
ensure that ultimate goal of such EAPs is provision of 
FHTCs, and such projects can cover both rural and 
urban areas. States/ UTs are encouraged to seek 
external financial assistance through EAPs funded by 
bi-lateral and multi-lateral agencies. 
The proposal for EAP would clearly mention the 
number of FHTCs that can be provided under it and 
increase in the overall percentage of rural FHTCs 
based on SAP. The States have to follow the 
procedure laid down by the Department of 
Economics Affairs, vide their communications No. 
/1/2019-BPC&T dated 25.11.2019 (Annex IX) 
which is the nodal Department for processing 
external assistance. 
The brief procedure for seeking external assistance 
is as under:
i.) 
all State/ UT Governments to prepare a 
Preliminary Project Report (PPR) proposal with 
tentative financial details as per the prescribed 
format by Department of Economic Affairs. The 
PPR is to be submitted only in the DEA's online 
portal . The nodal officer of the State/ UT 

would verify/ endorse the PPR online and mark 
online in the portal itself, to line Ministry of 
Govt. of India and NITI Aayog. In case activities 
relate to more than one Ministry, it should be 
endorsed to all Ministries. To illustrate, to seek 
external assistance for projects involving both 
urban and rural water supply, while submitting 
the PPR, the States should tag the PPR for both 
DDWS and M/o Housing and Urban Affairs;
ii.) in case of NE States, the PPR, in addition to line 
Ministries, should also be marked online to 
M/o DoNER, MHA and MEA. In case of UTs with 
Legislature, the PPR is to be marked to MHA for 
information. For UTs without Legislature, the 
PPR would be verified/ endorsed by nodal 
person in MHA and mark the PPR online to 
other GoI Ministries / Departments;
iii.) the nodal Ministries/ Departments to whom 
the PPR has been marked are to give their 
comments online within 45 days and 30 days in 
case of NE and other States respectively; 
iv.) the EAP proposal should align with development 
priorities of the State as well as Government of 
India. A special emphasis is laid on finance plus 
elements of the project;
v.) 
the Line Ministry/ Department after 
undertaking necessary technical appraisal will 
forward its report to DEA for further necessary 
action, online. In case of UTs, a copy of the 
report shall also be endorsed to MHA for 
information;
vi.) the PPRs received online with recommendations 
/ comments will be placed before the screening 
committee of DEA. Projects not satisfying the 
criteria would be rejected or returned by DEA, as 
the case may be.
hps://eapdea.gov.in/ppr/
To
The State Water and Sanitation Mission
Address:
. We have audited the attached Balance Sheet of State Water and Sanitation Mission ('the Grantee') 
Account  Erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) and Jal Jeevan Mission ( as the 
case may be) as at March 31, 20..and also the Income and Expenditure Account and Receipts and 
Payment Account for the year ended on that date annexed thereto. These financial statements are the 
responsibility of the Grantee's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these 
financial statements based on our audit.
.  We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in India. Those 
Standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the 
financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, 
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes 
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as 
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable 
basis for our opinion.
. Further to our comments in the Annexure referred to above, we report that:
i.  We have obtained all the information and explanations, which to the best of our knowledge and belief 
were necessary for the purposes of our audit;
ii. In our opinion, proper books of account as required have been kept by the Grantee so far as appears 
from our examination of those books;
iii. The balance sheet, income and expenditure account and receipts and payment account dealt with by 
this report are in agreement with the books of account;
iv. In our opinion, and to the best of our knowledge and according to the explanations given to us and 
subjects to our observations annexed herewith we report that :
a. The Balance Sheet, gives a true and correct view of the state and affairs of the Grantee Account  on 
Erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water Programme(NRDWP)/ Jal Jeevan Mission-JJM (As case may 
be)  as on 31.3.20..
b. The Income and Expenditure Account gives a true and correct view of excess of income over 
expenditure for the period ended 31.03.20. 
c. The receipts and Payment Account gives a true and correct view of the transactions under the 
programme/scheme for the period ended on 31.03.20.
v. Expenditure reported in the Income and Expenditure account is properly reflected in the Utilization 
Certificate(s) for the same period.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of Chartered Accountant with Seal)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name in full___________________________
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Membership No._______________________
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAG Empanelment No. & Year/ Contact No.
i.) Auditor's Report
Annex - III
i.) Purchase of land, vehicle, etc.
ii.) Centage charges
iii.) Construction/ Renovation/ Repair of building, office building, extension of building, conference hall, guest 
house, residential building, etc. 
iv.) Tender premium
v.) Diversion of fund from JJM schemes to State schemes
vi.) Expenditure beyond estimated/ approved cost of the schemes
vii.) Payment of salary to permanent employee
Annex - IV
Suggestive list of inadmissible expenses
Criteria for selection of Implementation 
Support Agencies (ISAs)
Annex - V
SWSM will identify suitable ISAs through a transparent process who are working in the field of
i.) Drinking water and community management
ii.) Water quality
iii.) Rain water harvesting/ recharge, water resources management 
iv.) Capacity building and awareness generation 
v.) Public health engineering
vi.) Gender & water 
The eligibility criteria for the ISAs would be
i.) A minimum 3 years experience as a registered organization for organizations under 4(a) including 
organizations under Registration of Societies Act 1860, or a Public Trust registered under Indian 
Trust Act 1982 or a corporation registered under Section 8 Companies Act. Or, experienced Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) within districts;
ii.) the organization should be a not-for-profit organization or use its profits, if any, or other income 
in promoting charitable objectives;
iii.) at least 3 years work experience in the aforementioned fields of the NGO chairpersons/ board/ 
or relevant authority who is proposed to lead the initiative;
iv.) experience of using Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) techniques and other communication 
tools in community mobilization;
v.) last three years duly audited and properly maintained accounts and income tax return and 
published Annual Report.
The selection process of ISAs would be as follows:
i.) The organizations wishing to get empanelled will get registered on JJM portal and SWSM will 
adopt a transparent selection process for ISAs from the portal and empanel them for their State;
ii.) only such organizations having a good track record in the related fields may be considered and 
preference may be given to ISAs with technical expertise of facilitating community-based rural 
water supply.
Prerequisites of ISAs:
i.) Separate bank account to receive financial assistance will be opened by the organisation
ii.) Working in rural drinking water sector should reflect in their Memorandum of Association as one 
of the activities
iii.) The organisation will be open to inspection by an officer/ third party agency authorized by the 
Department.
Functionality Assessment
Annex - VI
. DDWS, GoI will carry out functionality assessment of FHTCs
. The survey will be done for a sample set of completed SVSs and MVSs as well as households which 
are covered within these schemes.
. Functionality of FHTCs will be assessed with following parameters:
I.) Quantity, quality and regularity of water supply through FHTCs:
i.) Whether sub-committee of Gram Panchayat has been constituted? If so, does the O&M 
responsibility lie with thm?
ii.) Is water tariff being collected? If so, what's the mechanism in place?
iii.) Is there a borewell recharge structure? What are the other source sustainability measures?
iv.) Has provision been made for greywater management through waste stabilization pond or other 
structures?
v.) Has provision been made for rain water harvesting?
Fully-functional
Partially-functional
Non-functional
Quantity
>=55 lpcd
>40 lpcd
<55 lpcd
<40 lpcd
Quantity
Potable
Potable
Non potable
Regularity*
months or 
daily basis
-12 months
< daily basis
<9 months
< daily basis
Annex - VII
F.No. 55(5)/PF-II/2011
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Plan Finance-ll Division
New Delhi, 
th
dated 6  September, 2016
Office Memorandum
Subject: Guidelines for Flexi-Funds within Centrally Sponsored Schemes
. Reference is invited to this Department OM of even no. dated 6"" January, 2014 on the subject mentioned 
above. It was stipulated that the Central Ministries should provide 10% of their budget under each CSS as a 
flexi-fund, except for schemes which emanate from a legislation or where the whole or a substantial 
proportion of the budgetary allocation is flexible.
. Based on the recommendations of the Sub-Group of Chief Ministers and consultations with stake holders, NITI 
Aayog has issued instructions for Rationalization of CSS, vide OM No. O-11013/02/2015-CSS & CMC dated 17" 
August, 2016. As per para 6 of the said OM, flexi-funds available in each CSS has been raised from the current 
level of 10% to 25% for States, and 30% for UTs, of the overall annual allocation under each scheme.
. These instructions will be applicable for Centrally Sponsored Schemes, except those which emanate from a 
legislation (e.g. MGNREGA), or, schemes where the whole or a substantial proportion of the budgetary 
allocation is flexible (e.g. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna, Border Area Development Program, Shyama Prasad 
Mukherjee Rurban Mission etc.). The provisions of this Department's OM No.55(5)/PF-II/2011 dated 6" 
January, 2014 ibid are substituted as follows:
Objectives
. The flexi-fund component within the Centrally Sponsored Schemes can be used to achieve the following 
objectives:
(i) To provide flexibility to States to meet local needs and requirements within the overall objective of any 
given Scheme at the sub-head level;
(ii) To pilot innovation to improve efficiency within the overall objective of any given Scheme at the sub-
head level;
(iii) To undertake mitigation/ restoration activities in case of natural calamities, or to satisfy local 
requirements in areas affected by internal security disturbances.
Fund Allocation and Approval
. States may, if they so desire, set aside 25% of any Centrally Sponsored Scheme (including the central and 
state share for any given scheme in a financial year) as flexi fund to be spent on any sub-scheme or 
component or innovation that is in line with the overall aim and objectives of the approved Scheme.
. The States, who want to avail of the flexi-fund facility, should constitute a State Level Sanctioning Committee 
(SLSC) on the lines of RKVY to sanction projects or activities under the flexi-fund component. However, 
participation of the concerned Central Ministry would be mandatory in the SLSC before the flexi-fund facility 
is invoked under any Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 
Guidelines for flexi-funds within 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes
. It may be noted that the Name, Acronym and the Logo are the core feature of any Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, which must be retained for the flexi fund component as well. If the States change any of these core 
features, the central contribution will cease and the flexi fund component will become a purely state scheme.
Use of flexi-funds
. The flexi-fund would continue to be part of the parent Centrally Sponsored Scheme. It may be operated at 
the level of the Scheme, Sub-scheme and its Components, but not at the level of the Umbrella Program, for 
example, flexi-funds can be spent on any sub-scheme or component, including creation of a new innovative 
component, under the primary education scheme, but cannot be used to move primary education funds to 
the higher education or to any other sector. However, it would be permissible to use flexi-funds to converge 
different schemes under an umbrella program to improve efficiency and effectiveness of outcomes, for 
example, nutrition mission can be used to converge anganwadi services with maternity benefits, and health 
care networks can be used to provide a continuum of health care services across the primary, secondary and 
tertiary levels.
. It may also be noted that the purpose of flexi-funds is to enable the States to satisfy local needs and 
undertake innovations in areas covered by the Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Elexi-funds should not be used 
to substitute State's own schemes and project expenditures. It should also not be used for 
construction/repair of offices/residences for government officials, general publicity, purchase of 
vehicles/furniture for offices, distribution of consumer durables/non-durables, incentives/rewards for staff 
and other unproductive expenditures.
Monitoring, Evaluation & Audit
. Web-based reporting for the use of flexi-funds may be designed by adding modules to the existing MIS. 
Outcomes (medium term) and outputs (short term) should be part of the MIS along with pictures/images 
and good practices to ensure greater transparency and learning across States.
. Evaluation of flexi-funds may be done through the existing evaluation mechanism, including those set by the 
Ministries, NITI Aayog, or by independent third parties. Terms and conditions for evaluation may be designed 
in such a manner that outcomes of the Scheme as a whole, as well as the flexi-funds are well identified and 
measurable.
. Flexi-funds within each CSS will be subject to the same audit requirements as the parent Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, including audit by the Comptroller & Auditor General.
. These guidelines issue with the approval of the Finance Minister and come into force with immediate effect.
. Secretaries, All Departments/Ministries, Government of India.
. Chief Secretaries, All States/Union Territories. 
Annex - VIII
Criteria for selection of third party inspection agencies:
i.) The firm/ agency/ institution should have a minimum of 5 years of experience of undertaking 
inspection of project works relating to water supply and/ or civil infrastructure;
ii.) The firm should have monitored at least two projects;
iii.) The firm/agency should have multi-disciplinary engineering human resource in the field of civil/ 
mechanical/ electrical and environment;
iv.) The firm should have a minimum turnover of Rs 5 Crore.
ToR of third party inspection agencies:
.) To carry out inspection of all engineering works relating to civil, mechanical and electrical components 
executed under in-village infrastructure covering the following aspects
a. Sample checking of 
i.) test report of the materials used for construction;
ii.) quality control measures adopted at the time of construction in the field;
iii.) safety measures adopted at the time of construction in the field;
iv.) payment  for labour by the executing agency.
b. Quantity and quality of works executed as per the bill for payment claimed
c. Recommendations on the payment for the work executed.
d. Functioning of the in-village infrastructure during trial run
.) To carry out inspection of all engineering works relating to civil, mechanical and electrical components 
executed works executed other than in-village infrastructure (intake structures, treatment plants, intra 
and inter district distribution network, balancing/ intermediate reservoirs, pumping and electrical 
systems etc.,) covering the following aspects 
a. Sample checking of 
i.) test report of the materials used for construction;
ii.) quality control measures adopted at the time of construction in the field;
iii.) safety measures adopted at the time of construction in the field;
iv.) payment  for labour by the executing agency.
b. Quantity and quality of works executed as per the bill for payment claimed
c. Recommendations on the payment for the work executed.
d. Functioning of the infrastructure during trial run
.) Any other work as decided by the State Government/ UT Administration from the point of view of 
third party inspection.
Suggested criteria for selection and 
Terms of Reference (ToR) for third-party 
inspection agencies to be empanelled by States
Guidelines for Posing, Implementation and 
monitoring of EAPs
Annex - IX
No. 8/1/2019-BPC&T
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(BPC&T Section)
Dated 25 November 2019
Subject: Guidelines for Posing, Implementaon and Monitoring of Externally Aided Projects (EAPs)
. Department of Economic Aairs (DEA) funcons as the polical and administrave focal  
point in India for all engagements (loans, credits, grants, technical assistance etc.) with Mullateral Agencies, 
Bilateral Agi,ncies, and Internaonal Financial Instuons. External nance is received in the shape of 
loans/credits/Ocial Development Assistance (ODA)/Technical Assistance (TA) from Mul_lateral 
Development Banks (MDBs), Bilateral Agencies, and Internaonal Financial Instuons (!Fis). Project 
proposals seeking external nancial assistance received from Ministries/Departments in Government of 
India as well as from State Governments are examined and processed by DEA, and then posed to the 
agency/instuon concerned. 
.  From me to me, DEA has issued guidelines pertaining to project proposals for external  assistance in order 
to streamline the processes involved and make the external funding more eecve. Reference is invited .to 
thj_s Department's O.M.s No.3/3/2004-PMU dated May 9, 2005, No.3/6/2017-BPC & Tdated April 5, 2018, 
and No. 3/9/2015-BPC&T dated May 17, 2018, vide which these guidelines were issued for posing, 
implementaon and monitoring of EAPs. In supersession of the guidelines referred to above, the following 
 
guidelines are issued in this regard:
.  Preparaon and Submission of Preliminary Project Report (PPR) - State Sector Projects: In case of State 
Sector Projects, the State Government/Project Implementaon Authority (PIA) will submit a Preliminary 
Project Report (PPR) online through the web portal of DEA developed for this purpose 
[hp://eapdea.gov.in/ppr]. The web portal is funconal since 1st January 2019, and only proposals 
submied online are considered for examinaon by DEA. The PPR so submied is to be veried/ endorsed 
online by the nodal ocer concerned of the State. The proposal needs to.be marked online by the nodal 
ocer (on the portal itself) to the line ministry concerned in the Government of India, and Naonal 
Instuon for Transforming India (NIT!) Aayog. In case the acvies relate to the domain of more than one 
central line ministry, the proposal should be marked to all such ministries. The central line ministries 
concerned and NITI Aayog will examine the proposal and oer their recommendaons/comments and 
upload the same on the web portal itself within 30 days of receipt of the proposal on the portal and mark to 
the inistry/department/instuon concerned. If no comments are received within the spulated me 
period, it will be assumed that the ministry/department/instuon concerned has no comments to oer.
.  State Sector Projects in North East Region: In case of State Sector Projects received from States in the North 
East (NE) region, the State Government/Project Implementaon Authority (PIA). will submit the PPR online 
through the web portal referred to earlier. The PPR so submied is to be veried/ endorsed online by the 
nodal ocer concerned of the State. The proposal needs to be marked online by the nodal ocer to the line 
ministry concerned in the Government of India, and NITI Aayog. In case the acvies relate to the domain of 
more than one central line ministry, the proposal should be marked to all such ministries. In addion, the  
proposal should also be marked to Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (MDoNER), Ministry of 
Home Aairs (MHA), and Ministry of External Aairs (MEA). The central ministries concerned and NITI Aayog 
will examine the proposal and oer their recommendaons/comments and upload the same on the web 
portal itself within 45 days of receipt of the proposal on the portal and mark to the ministry/ 
 
department/instuon concerned. If no comments are received within the spulated me period, it will be 
assumed that the ministry/department/instuon concerned has no comments to oer. As the nodal 
ministry for the NE region, it will be MDoNER's responsibility to ensure that comments from Central 
ministries concerned as well as NITI Aayog, along with MDoNER's own comments, are received within the 
spulated me.
.  
 
Central Sector Projects: In case of Central Sector projects, Central Ministries/ Departments/PIA will submit 
the Preliminary Project Report (PPR) online through the web portal referred to earlier. The PPR so submied 
is to be veried/endorsed online by the nodal ocer of the ministry/department. The proposal needs to be 
marked online by the nodal ocer to NITI Aayog. Comments/concurrence of NITI Aayog must be received 
online within 30 days of receipt of the proposal on the portal. If no comments are received within the 
spulated me period, it will be assumed that the NITI Aayog has no comments to oer.
.  The proposals seeking external nancial assistance should generally be aligned with the  developmental 
priories of the State Government as well as Government of India. The development cooperaon 
programmes/ Country Partnership Framework/ Country Partnership Strategy of the external mullateral 
and bilateral funding agencies also aligned with the priories of Government. While processing the proposal 
for external funding, a special emphasis is laid on "nance plus" elements of the project, as EAPs are not 
viewed as merely meeng the nancing needs. 
. The PPRs received only through the online mode with recommendaons/comments will be placed before 
the Screening Commiee of the DEA. The projects which do not sasfy the criteria for posing the proposal for 
external assistance would be rejected or returned by DEA, as the case may be.
.  Proposals from Union Territories
(I)  Stand alone Projects of Union Territories with Legislature:
(i)  The procedure for project approval, fund ow and administraon in UTs with Legislature will be similar 
to the procedure followed in respect of EAPs of State Governments.
(ii)  Concerned UT Government will submit the PPR, duly approved at its competent level (by its Cabinet, if 
required) through the web portal referred to earlier. The PPR so submied is to be veried/ endorsed 
online by the nodal ocer concerned of the State. The proposal needs to be marked online by the nodal 
ocer (on the portal itself) to the line ministry concerned in the Government of India, and NITI Aayog. In 
case the acvies relate to the domain of more than one central line ministry, the proposal should be 
marked to all such ministries. The proposal would also be marked to MHA for informaon. The central 
ministries concerned and NITI Aayog will examine the proposal and oer their recommendaons/ 
comments and upload the same on the web portal itself within 30 days of receipt of the proposal on the 
portal and marked to the ministry/department/instuon concerned. If no comments are received 
within the spulated me period, it will be assumed that the ministry/department/instuon 
concerned has no comments to oer.
(iii) The Budget Division of DEA,  on  the  advice  of  concerned  Mullateral/ Bilateral Division in DEA, will 
make necessary budget allocaon for such EAPs in the Demand for Grants of the respecve UT, in the 
Expenditure Budget.
(iv) The fund ow for such standalone projects in UTs with Legislature will also be on back-to- back basis. 
Since UTs with Legislature have their own Consolidated Fund, the receipts from external debt through 
 
Central Government and repayments thereof will be reected in the Public Debt of the respecve UT 
  
Governments, as well.
(v) The monitoring of execuon of such projects shall be the responsibility of the concerned UT 
Government. However, MHA will do administrave coordinaon, wherever required.
Annex - IX
(II)  Stand alone Projects of Union Territories without Legislature:
(i)  In case of UTs without Legislature, such UTs will submit the PPR on the web portal referred to above. The 
PPR so submied is to be veried/ endorsed online by the nodal ocer concerned of the MHA. The 
proposal needs to be marked online by the nodal ocer (on the portal itself) to the line ministry 
concerned in the Government of India, and NIT! Aayog. In case the acvies relate to the domain of 
more than one central line ministry, the proposal should be marked to all such ministries. The central 
ministries concerned and NIT! Aayog will examine the proposal and oer their recommendaons/ 
comments and upload the same on the web portal itself within 30 days of receipt of the proposal on the 
portal and marked to the ministry/department/instuon concerned. If no comments are received 
 
within the spulated me period, it will be assumed that the ministry/department/instuon 
 
concerned has no comments to oer. It will be the responsibility of MHA to ensure that comments from 
Central ministries concerned as.well as NIT! Aayog, along with MHA's own comments, are received 
within the spulated me.
(ii) MHA will subsequently take all necessary administrave approvals, including Standing Finance 
Commiee (SFC)/ Expenditure Finance Commiee (EFG)/ Cabinet approval, based on details received 
from the line Ministries.
(iii) The Budget Division of DEA, on the advice of the concerned Division of DEA / oce of Controller of Aid, 
Accounts and Audit (CAAA), will make the necessary budgetary allocaon for such EAPs in the Demand 
for Grants of the respecve UT, in the Expenditure Budget.
(iv) UTs without Legislature do not have a separate Consolidated Fund. Their revenues ow into the 
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI), and their expenditures are also met out of the CFI, through the 
funconal Major Heads. Therefore, the funds raised on account of EAPs of UTs without Legislature will 
ow through Union Government Accounts and will be counted in the Central Government debt.
(v) The execuon/ implementaon of such projects shall be monitored by the concerned line Ministry. 
However, MHA will be responsible for overall coordinaon and administrave supervision of such 
proposals.
(III)  
EAP Projects in UTs with or without Legislature for Mul-State/Central Sector 
(i) Concerned UTs with legislature will propose their requirements directly to the concerned line Ministries, 
keeping MHA informed. UTs without legislature will propose their requirements to the line Ministry 
through MHA.
(ii) Concerned line Ministry will prepare, pose and get approval for such Mul State/ Central Sector project, 
with UT's component following the exisng process.
(iii) Budget provision in context of such schemes will be provided in the Demands for Grants of line Ministry/ 
Department under the funconal Major Heads in respect of UTs without legislature and under the Major 
Head '3602- Grants-in-aid for UT Governments with legislature' in respect of UTs with Legislature.
. Submission of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs): Upon approval of the proposal by the Screening Commiee 
of DEA, the State Governments/UTs should submit the Detailed Project Report (DPR),.duly approved by the 
competent authority, to the line ministry and the funding agency cit the earliest. In case of Central Sector 
projects, the DPR should be submied by the Ministry/Department concerned with the funding agency. The 
Detailed Project Report should adequately reect the strategic elements of techno-economic (economic 
viability, social cost benet, value addion, etc.), ecological (land use, ecological sustainability etc.), socio-
cultural (target populaon and gender maers, parcipaon, social impact, etc.) and instuonal 
(instuonal and organizaonal analysis, capacity building, training etc.) dimensions in the project design in 
measurable terms. 
 
It should be in accordance with the generic structure as suggested in Department of  Expenditure's O.M. 
No.1(2)-PF-11/03 dated 7th May, 2003. An objecve oriented project design in a matrix format along with 
work plan, cost and me schedule indicang target/output, cash ow statement etc. should also be a part of 
DPR. An indicave outline of above matrix is aached for guidance (Annexure).
. Counterpart Funding & Budget provisions: State Governments/Central Ministry concerned need to ensure 
that counterpart funds for the project, wherever applicable, are made. They also need to ensure that 
adequate budgetary provisions are made for EAPs. Necessary instrucons issued in this regard vide D.O. 
leers No. 5/1/99-FB-II dated 12th May, 1999 and No. 12/24/94-EFC (Coord.) dated 20th September, 1994 
may be referred to (copies enclosed).
. Technical Assistance Proposals: All proposals for Technical Assistance (TA) grant or lending TA will also be 
submied by PIAs/State Governments/Central Ministry concerned in the format prescribed for loan/credit 
(PPR) and submit the same online through the portal. Proposals seeking Transacon Advisory Services from 
MDBs/lFls/Bilateral agencies should also follow the same paern.
. Other Procedural Requirements: The EAP should be processed for seeking approval of the EFC/ Public 
Investment Board (PIB), as the case may be, immediately aer the appraisal is completed by the external 
funding agency and before negoaons are undertaken. It would also be necessary to obtain the approval of 
the competent authority for the project. Financial Advisers of the concerned Ministries/Departments may 
iniate mely acon for seeking approval of EFC/PIB on a fast track basis and they may also iniate mely 
acon for seeking approval of EFC/PIB for the schemes/ project immediately aer lapse of four weeks of the 
circulaon of EFC/PIB Memo. Detailed instrucon may be seen in the Department of Expenditure's circulars 
No: 1(1) PF.11/2011 dated 31st March, 2014.
. 
 
If the project proposal is to be implemented under a 'reform programme, or reforms are , to be brought in 
through modifying framework condions (e.g. introducon/abolion/reducon, _user charges, recovery of 
O&M cost, providing of incenve/subsidy, rehabilitaon schemes, etc.) for creang an enabling environment 
for implementaon of the project, such measures should be completed before the project is sent to 
Department of Economic Aairs. The project proposal should indicate the role of other organizaons (such 
as NGOs, voluntary organizaons/civil sociees) in the project implementaon, and their accountability. It 
should also indicate organizaonal/ instuonal set up (ownership) of the project on its compleon, for 
ensuring its sustainability.
.  For all externally aided projects, a project implementaon team should be established and it should be held 
fully responsible for the project execuon within the approved me and cost. The team should not have any 
concurrent responsibility and its connuity during the project implementaon period must be ensured. It 
may also be ensured that appropriate training to the Project team is imparted before the implementaon of 
the Project. The EFC/PIB memo should bring this out clearly. No project would be considered without such 
arrangements being clearly established.
.  Proposal for external assistance shall not be sent directly by any Central Ministry or State Government to the 
bilateral or mullateral funding agencies. The terms and condions of the external assistance should not be 
negoated with the external funding agencies except through Department of Economic Aairs. State 
Governments I Central Ministries are, therefore, requested to follow the procedure set out above for seeking 
external nancial assistance/technical assistance from MDBs/lFls/bilateral agencies.
. 
 
 
Monitoring and Evaluaon: Project authories shall improve monitoring of the projects by including 
comprehensive evaluaon of the project, both of performance and impact, in the project design itself. 
 
Evaluaon arrangements for the project, whether concurrent, mid- term or post-project should be spelt out 
 
in the project proposal. Concurrent evaluaon shouldfocus on in-depth reecon at a point considered 
signicant in the project cycle / programme. 
 
This could be at the end of a work phase or whenever special circumstances demand or at the closure of the 
project. Evaluaon may be carried out by expert agencies if it is commensurate with _ the cost and 
objecves. Best pracces adopted by external funding agencies with respect to concurrent evaluaon of 
projects may be adopted.
Annex - IX
. Project authories are expected to submit (a) project compleon report on the physical-nancial parameters 
and (b) evaluaon report on the project objecve achievement parameters aer compleon of the project. 
Two or three years aer compleon of the project, an Impact Assessment Study may also be conducted on 
selected project, preferably by reputed neutral instuon or organizaon to ascertain the actual 
achievement and retenon of project objecves vis-a-vis the targeted project objecves. Such long-term 
impact evaluaon is expected to help create a shelf of projects with high impact-retenon which should be 
 
encouraged and replicated, and the negave shelf of projects which were poor in aaining stated objecves, 
may be improved. The responsibility of monitoring and evaluaon of Central Sector Projects will lie with the 
concerned central sectoral Ministry/ Department. In case of State/ UT sector projects, the concerned 
State/UT will be responsible for carrying out the monitoring and evaluaon of projects.
(Rajat Kumar Mishra)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tele: 011 23094818
 
To,
 
) 
Secretaries of all Central Ministries/Departments
 
) 
Chief Secretaries of all State Governments/ Uts
 
) 
CEO, NITI Aayog
 
)  
Divisional Heads of all Credit Divisions in DEA
Department of Expenditure 
OM No:1(2)  dated 7th May, 2003
Generic structure of the DPR
(i) 
Context/ background: This secon should provide a brief descripon of the sector/ sub-sector, the naonal  
priority, strategy and policy framework as well as a brief descripon of the exisng situaon.
(ii) 
Problems to be addressed: This secon should elaborate the problems to be addressed through the 
project/ scheme at the local/ regional/ naonal level, as the case may be. Evidence regarding the nature and 
magnitude of the problems should be presented, supported by the baseline data/ surveys/ reports. Clear 
evidence should be available regarding the nature and magnitude of the problems to be addressed.
(iii) Project Objecves: This secon should indicate the Development Objecves proposed to be achieved, 
ranked in order of importance. The deliverables/ outputs for each Development Objecve should  be spelt 
out clearly. This secon should also provide a general descripon of the project.
(iv) Target beneciaries: There should be clear idencaon of the target beneciaries. Stakeholder analysis 
should be undertaken, including consultaon with stakeholders at the me of project formulaon. Opons 
regarding cost sharing and beneciary parcipaon should be explored and incorporated in the project. 
Impact of the project on weaker secons of the society, posive or negave, should be assessed and 
remedial steps suggested in case of adverse impact.
(v) 
Project strategy: This secon should present an analysis of alternave strategies available to achieve the 
Development Objecves. Reasons for selecng the proposed strategy should be brought out. Involvement 
of NGOs should be considered. Basis for priorizaon of locaons should be indicated (where relevant). 
Opons and opportunity for leveraging government funds through public-private partnership must be 
given priority and explored in depth.
(vi) Legal Framework: This sector should present the legal framework within which the project will be 
implemented and strengths and weakness of the legal framework in so far as it impacts on achievement of 
project objecves.
(vii) Environmental impact assessment: Environmental impact assessment should be undertaken, wherever 
required and measures idened to migate adverse impact, if any. Issues relang to land acquision, 
diversion of forest land, rehabilitaon and reselement should be addressed in this secon.
(viii) On-going iniaves: This secon should provide a descripon of ongoing iniaves and the manner in 
which duplicaon will be avoided and synergy created through the proposed project.
(ix) Technology issues: This secon should elaborate on technology choices, if any, evaluaon of opons, as 
well as the basis for choice of technology for the proposed project.
(x) 
Management arrangements: Responsibilies of dierent agencies for project management and 
implementaon should be elaborated. The organizaon structure at various levels as well as monitoring 
and coordinaon arrangements should be spelt out.
(xi) Means of Finance and Project Budget: This secon should focus on means of nance, evaluaon of 
opons. project budget, cost esmated and phasing of expenditure. Opons for cost sharing and cost 
recover (user charges) should be considered and built into the total project cost. Infrastructure projects 
may be assessed on the based on the cost of debt nance and tenor of debt. Opons for raising funds 
through private sector parcipaon should be considered and built into project cost.
(xii) Time Frame: This secon should indicate the proposed 'Zero' date for commencement and provide a PERT, 
CPM chart, wherever relevant.
(xiii) Risk analysis: This secon should focus on idencaon and assessment of project risks and how these are 
proposed to be migated. Risk analysis could include legal/ contractual risks, environmental risks, revenue 
risks, project management risks, regulatory risks, etc.
(xiv) Evaluaon:  This secon should focus on lessons learnt from evaluaon of similar projects implemented in 
the past. Evaluaon arrangements for the project, whether concurrent, mid-term or post project should be 
spelt out. It may be noted that connuaon of projects/ schemes from one Plan period to another will not 
be permissible without an independent, in depth evaluaon being undertaken.
(xv) Success criteria: Success criteria to assess whether the Development Objecves have been achieved 
should be spelt out in measurable terms. Base-line data should be available against which success of the 
project will be assessed at the end of the project (Impact assessment). In this regard, it is essenal that base-
line surveys be undertaken in case of large, beneciary-oriented projects.
 
Success criteria for each Deliverable/ Output of the project should also be specied in measurable terms to 
assess achievement against proximate goals.
(xvi) Financial and economic analysis: Financial and economic analysis of the project may be undertaken where 
the nancial returns are quanable. This analysis would generally be required for investment and 
infrastructure projects, but may not always be feasible for social sector projects where the benets cannot 
be easily quaned.
(xvii) Sustainability: Issues relang to sustainability, including stakeholder commitment, operaon and 
maintenance of assets aer project compleon, and other related issues should be addressed in this 
secon.
Note: Requirements of the EFC/PIB format may also be kept in view while preparing the DPR.
Annex - IX
District Action Plan (DAP)
Annex - XB
District Water and Sanitaon Mission is responsible for preparaon and nalizaon of DAP. The plan would be 
based on aggregaon of all Village Acon Plans prepared in the district. The plan, apart from giving the road-map 
to achieve the FHTCs within 2024, would also include the long term drinking water security of the district. For this, 
it would prepare a district annual water budget based on the quantum of surface and groundwater available, 
water available from long distance water transfer and assess the uses by domesc, agriculture, industrial, etc. It 
would also contain details of water conservaon acvies to be taken to ensure drinking water security by 
augmenng surface sources by rejuvenaon and restoraon of water bodies and recharging the groundwater 
aquifers. 
The plan would also focus on capacity building of all stakeholders by training them, organizing workshops/ 
seminars/ symposia's at district level, exchange visits to other districts, etc.. A suggested format for preparaon 
of the plan is given below.
S. No.
Name of the component
Remarks
I
General
i.) Name of the district
ii.) Full contact details of Collector/ DM, CEO of District Panchayat and Execuve 
Engineer in-charge of Rural Water Supply with mobile numbers and email ids. In 
case mulple departments are involved in rural water supply, provide contact 
details of all district level ocials from these departments.
iii.) No. of Blocks
iv.) No. of GPs
v.) No. of census coded revenue villages 
vi.) Total no. of households in the villages
vii.) No. of villages to be included under Jal Jeevan Mission
viii.) 
No. of households already having FHTCs 
ix) Balance FHTCs required to be provided by March 2024 
II
District water security.
a. Whether district water budget has been prepared?
b. On the basis of the water budget, whether availability of water is sucient to ensure 
drinking water security for the enre year?
c. Conservaon eorts required to be undertaken for achieving water security  
groundwater recharge, rain water harvesng, surface water source augmentaon 
through restoraon/ rejuvenaon of water bodies in the districts, grey water 
management etc.
d. Proposed acon plan for water conservaon and idenfying funds for the same.
e. Year-wise details of works to be undertaken and along with idened funding 
sources.
State Action Plan
Annex - XC
State Water and Sanitation Mission is responsible for preparation and finalization of SAP which would be 
approved by the NJJM. The plan would be based on aggregation of all districtAction Plans prepared in the 
State. The plan, apart from giving the road-map to achieve the FHTCs within 2024, would also include the 
long term drinking water security of the State. For this, it would prepare a State annual water budget based 
on the quantum of surface and groundwater available, water available from long distance water transfer 
from outside the State if any (like Krishna water waters for Tamilnadu, Indira Gandhi Canal in Rajasthan), 
regional water tyransfers planned within the State, innovative/ technological interventions for scattered/ 
hilly/ difficult terrain areas etc. and assess the domestic, agriculture, industrial, etc water uses. It would also 
contain details of water conservation activities to be taken to ensure drinking water security by augmenting 
surface sources by rejuvenation and restoration of water bodies and recharging the groundwater aquifers. 
The plan would also focus on capacity building of all stakeholders by training them, organizing workshops/ 
seminars/ symposia's at State level, exchange visits to other States, etc.. A suggested format for preparation 
of the plan is given below.
S. No.
Name of the component
Remarks
I
General
i.) Name of the State 
ii.) Full contact details of Principal Secretary/ Ocer heading the SWSM/ Engineer-in 
Chief/ Chief Engineer of Rural Water Supply with mobile numbers and email ids. 
In case mulple departments are involved in rural water supply, provide contact 
details of all State level ocials from these departments.
iii.) No. of districts
iv.) No. of Blocks
v.) No. of GPs
vi.) No. of census coded revenue villages 
vii.) Total no. of households in the villages.
viii.) 
No. of villages to be included under Jal Jeevan Mission
ix.) No. of households already having FHTCs 
x.) Balance FHTCs required to be provided by March 2024 
II
State water security.
a. Whether State water budget has been prepared?
b. On the basis of the water budget, whether availability of water is sucient to 
ensure drinking water security for the enre year?
c. 
Conservaon eorts required to be undertaken for achieving water security  
groundwater recharge, rain water harvesng, surface water source augmentaon 
through restoraon/ rejuvenaon of water bodies in the districts, grey water 
management etc.
d. Proposed acon plan for water conservaon and idenfying funds for the same.
e. Year-wise details of works to be undertaken and along with idened funding sources.
Procedure for Release under JE-AES 
Purpose and RWSSP-LIS Purpose
Releases will be made in 2 installments. 
st
a) Release of 1  Installment (50%):
nd
 
i.) For the states which have drawn the 2  installment during the last financial year - Funds will be released 
after subsuming excess opening balance beyond 10% of the last year release.
Or
nd
 
ii.) For the states which have not drawn the 2  installment during the last financial yearFunds will be 
released after getting the request proposal along with requisite documents including UC, check list and 
after subsuming excess opening balance beyond 10% of the last year release.
 
iii.) While releasing this part of the fund, the excess amount over and above the prescribed limit (10% of the 
st
previous year release) will be deducted. However, balance of 1  installment will be released as and when 
States furnish the UC showing expenditure of at least 60% of available fund. 
 
iv.) Carry over funds in the next financial year will be allowed to the 10% of the total amount released. If any 
amount for which sanction order has been issued in the month of March, the same will not be accounted 
for subsuming on account of excess Opening balance. 
nd
b) Release of 2  Installment (50%): On the receipt of the request proposal from the States along with:
 
i.) Provisional UC for the current year for the amount equivalent to 60% of available balance (Central fund) 
and State matching share;
 
ii.) AG's report of the year preceding the previous year / ASA of previous year;
 
iii.) Final Central and State UC for the previous year.
 
 
In the eventuality of availability of this fund during the fag end of the financial year, the methodology and 
apportioning procedure would be as per the direction of the competent authority. 
Procedure for Release under NWQSM Purpose: For NWQSM, a separate guideline has been issued and releases 
will be made as per the same and following GFR provisions in this respect.
Annex - XIII